SHIP03$$11 27-06-03 13:25:31 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PFOR Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
FOREWORD
In the First Report of the Shipman Inquiry, I disclosed my finding that Shipman had killed at least
215 of his patients over a period of 24 years.It was clear that the current arrangements for death
registration, cremation certification and coronial investigation in England and Wales had failed
both to deter Shipman from killing his patients and to detect his crimes after they had been
committed.The failure of the existing system prompted Parliament to set up the Shipman Inquiry,
with Terms of Reference requiring me to examine the present arrangements and to make
recommendations for changes that would protect patients in the future.
The focus of the Inquiry has therefore been primarily on the protection of patients from the actions
of a homicidal doctor.Yet, there are other important aims and objectives that must be served by
a system of death investigation and certification besides the protection of patients, important
though that is.The system must seek to protect the public from harm of other kinds and to expose
the wrongdoing of others besides an occasional aberrant health professional.A sound system will
advance medical science, through the better understanding of causes of death.It will assist in
planning for the better use of the huge resources now expended on the National Health Service.
It will serve the interests of private individuals by providing a proper understanding of the cause
and circumstances of a death in which they have an interest.It will assist in the prevention of
avoidable deaths and injuries in the future.My task has been to make recommendations for a
system that will meet the needs and legitimate expectations of society.
In the course of the Inquiry’s work, I invited views about how a new system might be devised.Many
individuals and organisations responded to my invitation with interesting and constructive ideas
for change.However, some respondents sought to persuade me not to propose any radical
changes to the system just because one doctor had been able to evade the existing safeguards.
I was urged to accept that the system was working reasonably well; a few minor changes was all
that was needed.There would never, it was said, be another Shipman.
It seems to me that there are two reasons why those arguments should not prevail.The first is that
we do not know that Shipman is unique.We know that he has killed more people than any other
serial killer yet identified, but we do not know how many other doctors have killed one or more
patients.Some such killings have come to light; others may remain hidden.If Shipman was able
to kill for almost 24 years before he was discovered, who can say with confidence that there are
not other doctors, still unknown, who have killed in the past? Who can say that there will be none
in the future? If there is a risk that a doctor might kill in the future and if, as is now clear, the present
system would neither deter nor detect such conduct, surely the system must be changed.
The second reason is that my investigations have satisfied me that the system is not working as
well as it should.The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that there is much dissatisfaction
with the present arrangements.It is said that the existing system is fragmented, is not sufficiently
professional, is applied to very variable standards in different parts of the country and does not
meet the needs of the public, especially the bereaved.It is said that it does not satisfy the public
interest in the discovery of the true causes of death in the population.It does not contribute, to the
extent that it should, to the improvement of public health and safety.If these complaints are
well founded, as I have found they are, then there are good reasons for radical change, quite apart
from the need to ensure that, so far as possible, homicide does not go undetected.
v
SHIP03$$11 27-06-03 13:25:31 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PFOR Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
In July 2001, while this Inquiry was working on Phase One, Mr Tom Luce was appointed to chair
a Fundamental Review of Death Certification and the Coroner Services in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland (the Coroners Review).His Terms of Reference overlapped, but were not
coterminous with, those of the Shipman Inquiry.He was asked to co-operate with the Inquiry.That
he has done and I am most grateful for the openness with which he shared the Review’s
developing ideas with the Inquiry, by speaking at one of our seminars in January 2003 and by
allowing me to read his Report in draft.
I also wish to express my gratitude to those individuals who have attended to give evidence and
to take part in the seminars.I must mention particularly those who came from overseas to
participate in the seminar relating to systems of death investigation and certification in other
jurisdictions.I thank, too, all those who wrote to the Inquiry giving their views about the present
system and their ideas for change and improvement.Many individuals and organisations have
provided witness statements, records, reports and other documentary material, thus enabling the
Inquiry to assemble a huge amount of evidence.All have been generous with their time and effort,
for which I am very grateful.
I must also thank Counsel, Dr Aneez Esmail, Henry Palin and other members of the Inquiry team,
who, as in Phase One, have worked with energy, determination and good humour and without
whose support this Report could not have been written.
This Inquiry was set up in the wake of a tragedy that shocked the world.It is my hope that some
good may now come from those tragic events and that in the future we will have, in this country,
systems of death investigation and certification that will bring real benefits in the fields of public
health and safety and will meet the needs and expectations of private individuals, especially the
bereaved.It is my earnest hope that the recommendations of this Report, together with those of
the Coroners Review, will lead to radical change.
Janet Smith
June 2003
vi
SHIP03IND2 11-06-03 06:45:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: SO ProofRound: 2
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
SUMMARY
RECOMMENDATIONS
CHAPTER ONE The Conduct of Phase Two, Stage Two of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference 33
The Subject Matter 33
The Inquiry’s Approach 33
The Evidence 34
Before the Oral Hearings 45
The Oral Hearings 46
Submissions 47
The Seminars 47
The Structure of This Report 47
CHAPTER TWO Registration of Death, Medical Certification of the
Cause of Death and the Coronial System: a Brief
History
Introduction 51
Registration of Death and Medical Certification of the Cause of
Death 51
The Origins of the Coronial System 57
CHAPTER THREE The Origins of the Existing Cremation Certification
System
Introduction 63
The First Cremations 63
Statutory Recognition for Cremation 64
The Report of the Departmental Committee 1903 64
The Cremation Regulations 1903 67
The Period from 1904 to 1930 67
The Period from 1930 to 1950 68
The Report of the Interdepartmental Committee 70
The Period from 1950 to 1952 71
The Cremation Working Party 72
The Report of the Brodrick Committee 75
The Period from 1971 to 1977 82
The Period from 1978 to 1988 84
The Draft Cremation Regulations of 1989 90
The Period from 1990 to the Present 90
vii
SHIP03IND2 11-06-03 06:45:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
CHAPTER FOUR The Functions of the Police, Ambulance Services,
General Practitioners and Deputising Doctors in the
Immediate Aftermath of a Death in the Community
Introduction 95
The Role of the Ambulance Service 95
Police Attendance at the Scene of a Death 97
Attendance of a Doctor When a Death Occurs Outside Normal
Working Hours 101
The Need for Clarity 105
Further Involvement of the Police 105
Is Police Involvement in the Investigation of Deaths for the Coroner
Appropriate? 108
Conclusions 111
CHAPTER FIVE Medical Certification of the Cause of Death
The Existing System 113
The Purposes of the System 116
The Strengths and Weaknesses of the System 117
Reporting a Death to the Coroner 123
No Certificate of the Fact of Death 126
Shipman’s Manipulation of the System 127
Loss of Public Confidence due to Shipman 128
Conclusions 128
CHAPTER SIX Registration of Deaths
The Registration Service 131
The Registration of a Death 132
The Duty of a Registrar to Report a Death to the Coroner 133
The Process of Registration 135
The Registrar’s Duty to Scrutinise the Medical Certificate of Cause of
Death 137
Reports to the Coroner 141
Conclusions 144
Future Changes to the Registration Process 145
CHAPTER SEVEN Coroners and Their Jurisdiction
Status, Appointment, Removal and Conditions of Service 149
The Basis of the Coroner’s Jurisdiction 152
Some Weaknesses of the Current Coronial System 155
Decisions about Jurisdiction 158
Shipman’s Practice of Reporting Deaths to the Coroner 177
Conclusions 178
viii
SHIP03IND2 11-06-03 06:45:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
CHAPTER EIGHT The Role of the Coroner’s Officer
Introduction 183
Historical Background 183
Recent Developments 184
Inquiry Evidence: Training 185
Inquiry Evidence: Variability of Support 186
Inquiry Evidence: the Employment Position of Coroner’s
Officers 192
Recognition of the Need for Change 192
Conclusions 194
CHAPTER NINE Coroners’ Investigations and Inquests
Introduction 195
The Process of Investigation: the Autopsy 196
The Process of Investigation: Preparation for the Inquest 203
Conclusions about Investigations 211
Inquests 212
Conclusions about Inquests 218
CHAPTER TEN The Role of Pathology in the Coroner Service
Hospital and Coroners’ Autopsies 221
The Practitioners Who Conduct Autopsies 221
Problems with Coroners’ Autopsies 222
The Future Delivery of Autopsy Services 225
The Purpose of the Autopsy 228
External Examination 229
The Partial Autopsy 230
The Use of Non-Invasive Techniques 231
Histopathology 232
Toxicology 234
Challenge to the Decision to Hold or Not to Hold an Autopsy 235
Conclusions 236
CHAPTER ELEVEN Cremation Certification
Introduction 237
The Application for Cremation: Form A 237
The Certificate of Medical Attendant: Form B 238
The Confirmatory Medical Certificate: Form C 242
The Authority to Cremate: Form F 253
The Role of the Home Office 264
The Future of Cremation Certification 268
CHAPTER TWELVE The Bereaved Relatives
Introduction 271
Death and Cremation Registration and Certification 271
The Views of the Relatives of Shipman’s Victims 273
Coronial Investigation, Autopsies and Inquests 275
Two Related Issues 277
The Special Needs of Minority Groups 279
ix
SHIP03IND2 11-06-03 06:45:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
CHAPTER THIRTEEN The Death of Mrs Renate Overton
Introduction 283
Background 283
The Events of Friday, 18th February 1994 284
Saturday, 19th February 1994 295
The Involvement of Dr Brown 296
Mrs Overton’s Transfer to Ward 17 305
The Issue of Withdrawal of Treatment 305
Mrs Overton Remains on Ward 17 309
The Weeks Leading up to Mrs Overton’s Death 311
Mrs Overton’s Death 311
The Report of the Death to the Coroner 312
The Autopsy 321
Mr Revington Decides that No Inquest Is Necessary 326
The Registration of the Death 328
The Reaction of Dr Husaini and Dr Pyburn 328
The Actions of the Doctors following Shipman’s Arrest 329
Responsibility 330
General Conclusions 334
CHAPTER FOURTEEN The Tameside Registrars and the General Register
Office
Introduction 335
Should the Frequency of Registration of Deaths Certified by
Shipman Have Been Noticed? 335
Had Any Registrar Noticed an Excess of Deaths Certified by
Shipman? 337
Procedures at the Register Office 338
Individual Deaths 343
Conclusions 350
CHAPTER FIFTEEN The Doctors Who Signed Cremation Forms C for
Shipman’s Patients
Introduction 353
Todmorden 353
Hyde 353
Assessing the Performance of the Hyde Doctors 354
Form C Certification by the Individual Doctors 358
Conclusions 385
CHAPTER SIXTEEN The Dukinfield Crematorium Medical Referees
Introduction 389
Professional Experience 389
The Task to Be Undertaken 390
Should the Medical Referees Have Noticed Shipman’s
Activities? 394
Other Medical Referees 400
Conclusions 400
x
SHIP03IND2 11-06-03 06:45:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN The Inquiry’s Consultation Process: Responses to
the Discussion Paper, the Seminars and the
Feasibility Study
Introduction 403
The Objectives of a Revised System for Death Investigation and
Certification 404
The Bereaved – Should They Be Involved in the Death Certification
Process? 405
The Desirability and Feasibility of Creating a New Role of Medical
Coroner 407
The Position of the Medical Coroner within the System 409
The Medical Coroner 412
The Investigation of Individual Deaths 414
The Imposition of a Statutory Duty to Report to the Coroner 421
Certifying the Fact of Death and Ascertaining the Circumstances of
Death: Form 1 423
Responsibility for Coroners’ Investigations 431
The Interface between the Coroner Service and the Police and Other
Investigative Agencies 433
The Role of the Coroner Service When There Is a Suspicion of
Criminal Involvement 434
Investigations on Behalf of the Coroner 436
Certifying the Cause of Death 440
External Examination of the Deceased’s Body 445
The Interface between the Medical Coroner and the Judicial
Coroner 449
Registration of Death 453
The Inquiry’s New Forms 454
The Feasibility Study 456
The Result of the Consultation Process 458
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN Systems of Death Investigation and Certification in
Other Jurisdictions
Introduction 459
The System in Victoria, Australia 459
The System in Ontario, Canada 465
The System in Maryland, USA 472
The System in Finland 478
The System in Scotland 482
xi
SHIP03IND2 11-06-03 06:45:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
CHAPTER NINETEEN Proposals for Change
Introduction – the Problems Summarised 487
The Fundamental Review of Death Certification and the Coroner
Services 488
Should a Coronial System Be Retained? 489
The Aim and Purposes of the New Coroner Service 489
The Need for Leadership, Training and Expertise in the Coroner
Service 490
Proposals for the Structure and Operation of the Coroner
Service 492
Death Certification and the Reporting of Deaths to the Coroner 495
Registration 507
The Next Stage – Further Investigation 508
Funding, Resources and Recruitment 515
Pathology Services 517
The Duty to Report Concerns to the Coroner 519
Audit and Appeal 520
The Human Rights Act 1998 521
Transitional Arrangements 521
APPENDIX A Participants in Phase Two, Stage Two of the Inquiry
and Their Representatives
APPENDIX B Specimen Medical Certificate of Cause of Death
APPENDIX C Registrars’ Forms and Forms Provided by the
Registrar General for the Use of Coroners
APPENDIX D Cremation Forms
APPENDIX E Respondents to the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper
APPENDIX F Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 13th – 24th
January 2003
APPENDIX G Inquiry’s Proposed Form 1 (Community) with
Explanatory Notes and Sample Completed Form
APPENDIX H Inquiry’s Proposed Form1 (Hospital) with
Explanatory Notes and Sample Completed Form
APPENDIX I Inquiry’s Proposed Form1 (Hospital A & E) with
Explanatory Notes and Sample Completed Form
APPENDIX J Inquiry’s Proposed Form 2 (Community) with
Explanatory Notes and Sample Completed Form
APPENDIX K Inquiry’s Proposed Form2 (Hospital) with
Explanatory Notes and Sample Completed Form
APPENDIX L A Blueprint for the Operation of the Coroner Service
APPENDIX M How Death Certification Would Work in Practice
xii
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
SUMMARY
Introduction
1. Following my First Report, which set out my finding that Shipman had killed at least 215
of his patients over a period of 24 years, it was clear that the arrangements for death and
cremation certification and the coronial system, which are intended to protect the public
against the concealment of homicide, had failed to fulfil that purpose. The Inquiry’s Terms
of Reference required me to examine the present systems, together with the conduct of
those who had been responsible for operating them in the aftermath of the deaths of
Shipman’s victims. I was also required to recommend what steps, if any, should be taken
to protect patients in the future.
2. In the course of Phase Two, Stage Two, I have received a wealth of evidence, both oral
and written. I have heard from many witnesses who have experience of the day-to-day
operation of the existing systems. I have heard evidence from some of the bereaved
relatives of Shipman’s victims about their experiences and their ideas for change. I have
considered the history of the systems and read many reports, reviews and commentaries,
which have been written about them over the years. I have been referred to a great deal
of documentary evidence concerning the systems as they operate today.
3. In addition, I have had the opportunity of reading the responses to the Consultation Papers
published by two recent Home Office Reviews, the Review into Death Certification, which
reported in 2001, and the Fundamental Review of Death Certification and the Coroner
Services in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, whose Report was published in June
2003. The Inquiry has carried out its own consultation process. In October last year, its
Discussion Paper, ‘Developing a New System for Death Certification’, was published.
Written responses were received from 154 individuals and organisations. A series of
seminars was held in January 2003, at which the Inquiry’s ideas for change were
discussed by representatives of organisations with a particular interest or involvement in
post-death procedures and with a number of individuals who have a special knowledge
of those procedures. One of the seminars was attended by representatives of five
jurisdictions whose systems of death investigation and certification had features that were
of interest to the Inquiry. The Inquiry conducted a small feasibility study into the use of the
forms which had been designed as part of a new system of death certification.
4. I have been able to set all that material against the background of the evidence, both lay
and expert, which I had received during Phase One of the Inquiry, when I considered and
reported upon the circumstances and aftermath of just under 500 deaths of Shipman’s
patients.
The Bereaved Relatives
5. The evidence about the present post-death procedures shows that the families of
deceased persons are little involved in the processes of certification and investigation of
a death. It also shows that the needs and expectations of the bereaved relatives are
sometimes not given the consideration they deserve. Of course, it is not just families who
are affected by a death. In speaking of ‘relatives’ and ‘families’, I am intending to indicate
1
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
anyone who is sufficiently close to the deceased person to have a proper interest in the
cause of his/her death and any investigation into it.
6. The evidence also shows that the present procedures fail to tap a source of information
about the deceased person and the circumstances of his/her death that would be of great
value to the process of death certification and investigation.
7. Any changes contemplated for the future must seek to ensure that families are kept
informed about, and are consulted and involved at all stages of, the post-death
procedures. However, their involvement must be handled sensitively and not intrusively.
The needs of those minority ethnic or religious groups whose members wish to arrange
disposal of the body as soon as possible after the death must also be borne in mind in any
proposals for change.
Certification of the Fact of Death
8. At present, there is no requirement that a doctor or any other health professional should
certify the fact that a person has died. In my view, there should be a requirement that the
fact that death has occurred should be confirmed and certified. The person who confirms
the fact of death (who might be a doctor or an accredited nurse or paramedic) should
complete a form, recording information about the circumstances of the death. Not only
would such a form assist in the professional scrutiny of the circumstances of death, it
would also form a valuable safeguard against any attempt to provide false information
about the death.
The Immediate Aftermath of a Death in the Community
9. When a death occurs in a hospital, hospice or care home, there are professionals on hand
who know what action to take. However, when a death occurs at home, the relatives,
friends or carers of the deceased often do not know what to do or what is expected of them
as their legal duty. At present, there is no single agency or authority with primary
responsibility for responding to the occurrence of a death. The ambulance service might
be summoned if it is thought that the deceased person might not be beyond resuscitation.
The police might be called, especially when the death has occurred suddenly, even
though there is no suspicion of criminal involvement. In other cases, relatives might
contact the deceased’s general practitioner. Depending on the circumstances and time
of day, either the general practitioner or a doctor from the deputising service might attend.
10. It is clear from the evidence received by the Inquiry that the present arrangements for
dealing with the aftermath of a death in the community are unsatisfactory, especially in
relation to deaths that occur out of normal working hours. Different procedures operate in
different parts of the country. There is confusion about what is expected of the police,
ambulance and medical services. There is also tension between the services, each of
which has justifiable concerns about the use of its resources in attending deaths where the
deceased is clearly beyond medical help and where there is no suspicion of any criminal
involvement in the death. All the services have what might properly be regarded as more
pressing duties in relation to the living.
2
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
11. In my view, there should be a nationally agreed policy for dealing with the immediate
aftermath of a death occurring in the community. There will always be a role for the police,
ambulance service and doctors in dealing with the aftermath of a death. However, I
consider that their roles should be secondary to, and supportive of, a service with primary
responsibility for dealing with deaths in the community, whenever they occur. In my view,
this service should be based in the coroner’s office and the provision of such a service
should be one of the duties of a team of well-trained coroner’s officers.
Medical Certification of the Cause of Death
12. Since 1926, the law has required that, before a death can be registered and the body
disposed of by burial or cremation, the medical cause of death must be certified by a
doctor who has attended the deceased during his/her last illness or by a coroner after
autopsy or inquest. The procedure for certifying the medical cause of death has remained
virtually unchanged for over 75 years.
13. The current procedure has three very real advantages; it is speedy, cheap and
convenient. However, it has a number of disadvantages. The most serious of these is that it
is dependent on the integrity and judgement of a single medical practitioner. That medical
practitioner, if s/he has attended the deceased during the last illness, must decide
whether s/he should report the death to the coroner or whether s/he can properly issue the
medical certificate of cause of death (MCCD).
14. One of the circumstances in which a death should be reported to the coroner is if the death
is sudden and the cause is unknown. Many of Shipman’s patients died suddenly in
circumstances in which no honest doctor could have claimed to know the cause of death.
Yet Shipman, who had killed them, was able to certify the cause of death, avoid a report
to the coroner and thus also avoid any official enquiry into the death.
15. The fact that the system of certification of the cause of death depends on a single doctor
does not give rise only to the risk of concealment of crime or other wrongdoing by that
doctor. There may be occasions when a doctor knows that a death may have been caused
or contributed to by some misconduct, lack of care or medical error on the part of a
professional colleague. In those circumstances, it takes considerable courage and
independence for a doctor (particularly a junior doctor) to refuse to certify a death, when
s/he knows that, if s/he does refuse, the death will be subject to a coroner’s investigation.
Pressure might also be exerted by the relatives of a deceased person. They might try to
persuade the doctor to certify a cause of death so as to avoid a referral to the coroner and
the possibility of an autopsy. They might also seek to press the doctor to state on the
MCCD a cause of death which is not the true one, but which will cause the family less
embarrassment or difficulty than the condition from which the deceased actually died.
Once again, it can be very hard for a doctor to withstand that sort of pressure.
16. Research has shown that, even when not subjected to pressures of that kind, doctors still
have difficulty in recognising those deaths that should be reported to the coroner. The
categories of ‘reportable deaths’ are not easy to interpret and the matter is complicated
by the fact that different coroners operate different ‘local rules’ governing the deaths which
3
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
should be reported to them. Research has shown that there is likely to be a significant
proportion of deaths that, under the present law, should be reported to the coroner but
are not.
17. A further problem with the current system is that the quality of certification is poor. Doctors
receive little training in death certification. In hospitals, certification is often done by very
junior doctors (sometimes in their pre-registration year) with little or no help from their
senior colleagues. The standard of certification among general practitioners appears to
be rather better although since, in general, they certify relatively few deaths, some still
experience difficulty on occasions. The fact that deaths are not being certified correctly
has an obvious impact on the quality of the mortality statistics which inform public
health policy.
18. The Inquiry has heard that some general practitioners never report a death to the coroner.
It seems unlikely that this is because no death certified by them ever comes within the
category of reportable deaths. It is more likely that the doctor does not know which deaths
should be reported, or does know but is seeking to spare families the ordeal of a report to
the coroner and a possible autopsy. It may be that the doctor has personal objections to
the autopsy process. Research has confirmed that some doctors are willing to ‘modify’
what they believe to be the true cause of death in order to avoid a report to the coroner.
19. Once a doctor has certified the cause of death then, provided that s/he has completed the
MCCD fully and in appropriate terms, there is no check on the truth or accuracy of what
s/he states. There is no system of audit or review of those cases where a doctor certifies
the cause of death and does not report the death to the coroner. The relatives of the
deceased person will take the MCCD to the register office, the death will be registered and
a disposal certificate issued. A burial can then take place without any further check or
formality.
20. In my view, the present arrangements, whereby, in effect, doctors decide whether or not
to report a death to the coroner, are not satisfactory and should not be allowed to continue.
Registration of Deaths
21. The death of every person dying in England and Wales must be registered. Except where
an inquest is held, the informant (usually a close relative) must attend personally before
the local registrar to give the particulars necessary for the death to be registered. In cases
where there has been no autopsy, the informant takes with him/her a copy of the MCCD
which s/he will have been given by the certifying doctor.
22. Registrars have no medical experience. Their role is essentially administrative. They are
required to record details of births, marriages and deaths. The information received by
registrars forms the basis of an important public record that is widely used for statistical
and research purposes. It is vital that it is recorded meticulously and accurately.
Registrars also have to deal with members of the public and to guide them through the
formalities associated with the most important of all life events.
23. Registrars are accountable to the Registrar General, whose office, the General Register
Office (GRO), forms part of the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The GRO provides
4
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
guidance to registrars on a range of matters, including the circumstances in which a death
should be reported to the coroner.
24. In the case of the registration of a death, registrars are required to perform a function of a
completely different nature from those referred to above. They have a statutory duty to
report to the coroner deaths which fall within certain specified categories. In order to
decide whether such a duty arises in respect of a particular death, they have to scrutinise
the MCCD and assess, insofar as they are able, whether it provides an acceptable
medical explanation for the death. They have to be alert to circumstances that might be
mentioned in, or evident from, the MCCD and which might make a report to the coroner
appropriate. The medical terminology used on the MCCD to describe the cause of death
may be difficult to understand for someone without medical expertise. Some registrars
told the Inquiry that they felt ill equipped to undertake this task. I can understand why that
is so.
25. Registrars report comparatively few deaths to coroners. The main reason for this is
probably that most obviously reportable deaths will already have been reported by
doctors before the death comes for registration. However, another reason may be that the
registrar has little opportunity to discover whether there are any circumstances that might
render the death reportable. The MCCD itself contains very limited information.
Sometimes, the informant or another member of a deceased person’s family might
volunteer information that suggests that the death should be reported. However, there is
no requirement for the registrar formally to seek information relating to the circumstances
surrounding the death. Nor is the registrar required to confirm the information given by the
certifying doctor on the MCCD. If it appears to the registrar that there are circumstances
that suggest that the death is reportable to the coroner, his/her duty is to make the report.
However, the registrar is not required to make direct enquiries of the informant, with a view
to ascertaining whether or not such a report is necessary.
26. Registrars are not trained or equipped to provide the only form of scrutiny to which MCCDs
issued by medical practitioners are subjected. I have concluded that, in future, any
information about cause of death provided by a doctor should be scrutinised by a person
with a medical qualification, or at least by someone with special training in medical matters
and ready access to expert medical advice. That person should also have the opportunity
to cross-check the essential facts with a relative of the deceased or someone with
knowledge of the circumstances of the death. In my view, the task of scrutinising a cause
of death should no longer be that of the registrars. Theirs should be a purely administrative
function.
The Tameside Registrars
27. Most of the deaths of Shipman’s patients, including the deaths of those whom he killed,
were registered at the Tameside register office. It was therefore necessary for the Inquiry
to examine procedures and practices at the office, both generally and in relation to
Shipman.
28. After Shipman’s criminal activities were revealed, there were suggestions that the
registrars at the Tameside register office should have noticed that they were registering
5
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
an excessive number of deaths which had been certified by Shipman. There are four
registrars at the Tameside register office. Each is responsible for her own register of
deaths. Some registration is carried out by deputy registrars. No registrar sees the
complete picture of death registrations effected in the office as a whole. Nor is there any
system (or any duty to operate such a system) for the gathering of statistics relating to
deaths. The identity of the doctor who certified the cause of a death would not be
significant unless some difficulty arose over the MCCD. Shipman usually took care to
ensure that no such difficulty arose.
29. The Inquiry examined the numbers of Shipman-certified deaths registered by two current
registrars and one former registrar. These three registrars had been responsible for
registering the greatest number of deaths certified by Shipman. The numbers of deaths
certified by Shipman were compared with the (very large) total numbers of deaths
registered by the registrars during the same period. Also, the Inquiry looked at a number
of short periods of time when the concentration of Shipman-certified deaths registered by
each registrar was at its highest. The object was to see whether, during those short
periods, the frequency of Shipman-certified deaths should have been noticeable.
30. That exercise having been carried out, I am quite satisfied that the frequency with which
Shipman-certified deaths occurred would not have been noticeable to any registrar. Nor,
in my view, were the clusters of greatest intensity particularly remarkable. Such research
as the Inquiry team was able to carry out showed that clusters of deaths certified by an
individual doctor occur with reasonable frequency. Nor was there any evidence from
which I could reasonably infer that any of the registrars had noticed an excess of deaths
certified by Shipman or that they had had any other concerns about him.
31. The close scrutiny to which the procedures in operation at the Tameside register office
were subjected by the Inquiry resulted in questions being raised about some of the
practices in operation within the office. One in particular – whereby registrars would
contact doctors who had issued MCCDs stating unacceptable causes of death, rather
than reporting the death to the coroner’s office and leaving it to the staff there to sort out
the problem – gave rise to particular concern. However, whilst there is no doubt in my mind
that this constituted poor practice, I am satisfied that the Tameside registrars undertook
responsibility for contacting doctors in these circumstances because the coroner’s office
put pressure on them to do so and because they believed that, in doing so, they would
be assisting the bereaved relatives by ensuring that, in an appropriate case, the defective
MCCD was amended or replaced as soon as possible so as to allow the registration to
proceed.
32. I am quite satisfied that neither the practice I have referred to above, nor any of the other
procedures in operation at the Tameside register office, had any adverse effect on the
registration process in cases where Shipman had killed.
33. It is not surprising that some departures from accepted practice occurred at the Tameside
register office. The registrars there had not received clear training or guidance on the
points of practice that arose. They had little opportunity to meet registrars from other
areas. Accordingly, they had little opportunity to discover and correct any shortcomings
in their own practice, or to gain the necessary confidence to insist upon compliance with
6
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
correct statutory procedures by others. It is plain, moreover, from correspondence
received from the GRO since the Inquiry hearings, that the departures from best practice
about which the Inquiry has heard are not confined to Tameside. Indeed, such is the
concern of officials at the GRO about variations in practice throughout the country, that
they have now written to all registrars, giving guidance about good practice in relation to a
number of matters that have been explored in the course of evidence given to this Inquiry.
The General Register Office
34. The GRO operates a telephone advice line, which a registrar can use if unsure whether a
death should be reported to the coroner. However, the staff who operate the advice line
have no medical expertise or specific training for the task and are reliant upon medical
reference books and notes of past advice given or received. They have access to medical
epidemiologists employed by the ONS but the evidence strongly suggests that most
queries are resolved by GRO staff without recourse to medical advice.
35. The Inquiry identified two deaths in 1996, where registrars at the Tameside register office
had sought advice from the GRO before registering the death. On both occasions,
Shipman had killed the deceased person and certified that the death was due to ‘natural
causes’. When the deaths came to be registered, the registrars at Tameside were
uncertain as to whether ‘natural causes’ constituted an acceptable cause of death. They
were advised by staff at the GRO that it did and that the deaths could therefore be
registered. In fact, it was agreed by all who gave evidence to the Inquiry that ‘natural
causes’ should never be acceptable to the registration service as a cause of death. The
expression does not explain what has caused the death. It asserts only that the death was
due to a natural disease process.
36. No explanation was advanced for the giving of the faulty advice. No clear written advice
on the acceptability or otherwise of ‘natural causes’ as a cause of death was promulgated
by the GRO, whether for the benefit of registrars or its own staff. That deficiency has been
rectified since the Inquiry hearings. It is clear that the situation did not arise very frequently
in practice. However, it appears that there must have been some misunderstanding
amongst staff within the relevant section of the GRO about the status of ‘natural causes’
as a cause of death. This is worrying, since the giving of poor advice by the GRO in turn
disseminates poor practice elsewhere.
37. In my view, the problems are caused in large part by a system in which clerical staff without
medical expertise are seeking to advise other clerical staff on matters which are
essentially medical in nature.
38. Even had the advice of the GRO in both cases been correct, namely that the cause of
death was not acceptable and the death should be reported to the coroner, I do not think
that the outcome of either case would have been significantly different from what in fact
occurred. Shipman would have been contacted and would have provided a more specific
cause of death. That cause of death would have been duly registered. It is highly unlikely
that any further investigation of either death would have followed.
7
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Cremation Certification
39. Over 70% of deaths in the UK are now followed by cremation. In 1903, the year when the
first Cremation Regulations came into force, there were 477 cremations within the UK. In
2001, there were 427,944. During that period of almost 100 years, there has been very little
change in the system by which authority to cremate is granted.
The System
40. Once a death has been registered and a disposal certificate issued by the registrar, burial
can take place without any further check or formality. If any suspicion arises in the future
that the death was caused by an unlawful act, the body will (for a limited period at least)
be available for exhumation and forensic examination. When cremation was first
introduced, it was recognised that there would be no such opportunity to recover the
evidence when a body had been cremated. It was therefore decided that additional
safeguards should be implemented in cases where a disposal was to be by way of
cremation. The attending doctor (usually the same doctor who had issued the MCCD)
would complete a certificate (Form B), giving rather more information than that contained
on the MCCD. A second doctor would carry out his/her own enquiry and complete a
confirmatory certificate (Form C) and a medical referee, on behalf of the cremation
authority which operated the crematorium, would examine the forms and satisfy
him/herself that the forms were in order, that proper enquiry had been made and that the
cause of death had been definitely ascertained. He or she would then grant authority to
cremate. Form B and Form C doctors and the medical referee were to receive fees for their
part in the procedure, paid by the deceased’s estate. Currently, fees totalling just under
£100 are payable to the three doctors involved in authorising a cremation.
41. When the system was first devised, it was intended that the Form C doctor (who was to be
demonstrably independent and to occupy a prestigious public appointment) would carry
out a personal enquiry. Form C contained questions about the nature and extent of the
enquiry to be carried out. The doctor was asked whether s/he had seen and carefully
examined the body of the deceased (questions 1 and 2), whether s/he had made a postmortem
examination (question 3), whether s/he had seen and questioned the Form B
doctor (question 4) and whether s/he had seen and questioned any other medical
practitioner who had attended the deceased, any person who had nursed the deceased
during his/her last illness or who was present at the death, any of the relatives of the
deceased or any other person (questions 5–8).
42. The form prescribed by the 1903 Cremation Regulations contained no requirement that
any of the questions on Form C should be answered in the affirmative and that remains the
position today. However, each crematorium produces its own cremation forms and every
Form C seen by the Inquiry has contained an instruction to the effect that questions 1, 2
and 4 should invariably be answered in the affirmative. The Inquiry has discovered that
some crematoria issue cremation forms which contain a note to the effect that one of
questions 5–8 also must be answered in the affirmative. The origin of this requirement is
not known but it seems that it has appeared on the forms of some crematoria for many
years, certainly for as long as the current personnel at the crematoria can remember.
8
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
43. The significance of an affirmative answer to one of questions 5–8 is that it indicates that
the Form C doctor has questioned someone (other than the Form B doctor) who has
knowledge of the deceased and of the circumstances of the death and has therefore had
the opportunity of comparing the information received from the Form B doctor with that
from another source.
The History
44. Over the years which followed the introduction of the cremation certification procedures,
concerns were frequently expressed about the value of those procedures and, in
particular, about the value of the personal enquiry undertaken by the Form C doctor. There
were suggestions that the examination of the deceased’s body by Form C doctors was
often perfunctory and that, sometimes, the Form C doctor did not even question the Form
B doctor. From time to time, it was also observed that the importance of the questioning
of a person other than the Form B doctor was being neglected. There was an ongoing
debate as to whether the cremation certification procedure should be abolished or
retained. There were some (chiefly the organisations responsible for running the
crematoria) who contended that the certification procedures should be abolished as they
were expensive and a disincentive to choosing cremation as a means of disposal. There
were others (notably the Government Law Officers, the police, the British Medical
Association (BMA) and the Association of Crematorium Medical Referees) who argued
that the procedures constituted a valuable safeguard against the concealment of crime.
No consensus on the way forward was possible and every attempt to strengthen the
system and make it more effective failed. In 1965, a Committee chaired by Mr Norman
(later Judge) Brodrick QC (‘the Brodrick Committee’) was set up to examine the system of
death certification and coroners. Cremation certification was included in its Terms of
Reference.
45. The Brodrick Committee reported in 1971. Members of the Committee concluded that the
system of medical certification of the cause of death should be strengthened. If that were
done, they recommended that the cremation certification procedures should be
abolished in their entirety. Even if no immediate steps were taken to change the death
certification system, the Committee nevertheless recommended that the Form C
procedure, which they regarded as valueless, could be abolished immediately without
risk. That recommendation – like all the recommendations of the Committee – was based
on its conclusion that the risk of secret homicide, whether by the attending doctor or
anyone else, was negligible. That conclusion, expressed four years or so before Shipman
began his course of killing, has of course been proved wrong by the events which have
followed.
46. After the Brodrick Committee had reported, the Home Office (which was responsible for
cremation-related matters) and the GRO (which had responsibility for taking forward the
recommendations relating to death certification) set about attempting to implement the
recommendations. However, abolition of the cremation procedures was opposed by
those organisations which had opposed it in the past. Meanwhile, the cremation
organisations and the National Association of Funeral Directors pressed for abolition.
Disputes arose also over the implementation of recommendations relating to death
9
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
certification. In 1984, plans for a Bill to implement those recommendations were shelved.
Efforts to abolish the Form C procedure (the interim measure that had been recommended
by the Brodrick Committee) also foundered in the face of opposition by the BMA. In
November 1988, the Home Office took the decision to abandon its attempts to abolish
Form C until the GRO had effected changes to the procedures for death certification.
Despite further attempts over the years, those changes were never effected and, more
than 30 years after the Brodrick Committee reported, the cremation certification
procedures remain virtually unaltered. However, even had the recommendations of the
Brodrick Committee been implemented in their entirety, including the recommendations
for strengthening the system of death certification, the course of Shipman’s killing would
not have been affected because the system would still have been dependent on the
integrity of a single doctor.
The Cremation Forms
Form B
47. The Inquiry heard evidence about the problems associated with the cremation
certification procedures. The meaning of some of the questions on Form B is uncertain and
ambiguous and there is no consistency of approach. Although a completed Form B
provides much more information than a completed MCCD, it does not require what I
regard as the two essentials for the investigation of any death, namely a brief medical
history and an account of the circumstances of the death.
Form C
48. The Form C procedure does not operate as it was intended to do when the procedure was
first devised. The Form C doctor, in the community at least, is generally not truly
independent of the Form B doctor. The Form B doctor will usually choose the doctor who
is to complete Form C; the relationship between the two doctors will often be close,
sometimes social as well as professional. Many doctors regard the completion of Form C
as a technical requirement only. They do not see themselves as carrying out an
independent investigation into the cause and circumstances of the death. The doctors
who gave oral evidence to the Inquiry admitted, when pressed about the matter, that they
had never previously thought that they were in any way ‘policing’ their colleagues. Most
had never thought that they were supposed to consider whether their colleagues might
have concealed wrongdoing of any kind, whether deliberate or through lack of care. Yet
this is the very purpose for which the personal enquiry by a second (Form C) doctor was
designed and intended.
49. The doctor who gives affirmative answers to questions 1, 2 and 4 on Form C will have seen
the deceased’s body and examined it to a greater or lesser extent. That examination may
have provided confirmatory evidence of the diagnosis of cause of death. More likely, the
examination will have been too superficial to reveal anything of significance, or the cause
of death will be one that would not give rise to visible signs, even on a thorough physical
examination. Thus, the examination will have provided no independent evidence upon
which the Form C doctor can rely. The Form C doctor will also have heard the account of
10
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the clinical history and the reasons for the diagnosis of cause of death, as propounded by
the Form B doctor. That account will not have been confirmed by inspection of the medical
records. Nor, unless there is a local requirement to do so, will most Form C doctors have
questioned anyone other than the Form B doctor.
50. There was no such local requirement at the Dukinfield crematorium. In the vast majority of
cases, the doctors who completed Forms C for Shipman did not question anyone
independent of him about the death. They trusted him as a respected colleague. He lied
to them; they believed his account of the death and they confirmed his dishonest opinion
of the cause of death. The Form C procedure, as operated, served no useful purpose as
a deterrent to Shipman’s activities or as a means of detecting those activities. The question
is whether it would have been useful in either respect if there had been a requirement that
the Form C doctor should question someone other than Shipman.
51. Had there been such a requirement, there would have been a real prospect that, in many
cases, the lies which Shipman had told when completing Form B (knowing that the form
would never be seen by the deceased’s relatives or carers) would have been exposed. It
is likely also that, had the Form C doctor spoken to some of the relatives of Shipman’s
victims, they would have expressed surprise, even concern, at the suddenness of the
death. The fact that, on many occasions, Shipman had certified the cause of a sudden
death on inadequate grounds would probably also have become clear.
52. The possibility that any of these consequences might follow a discussion between a Form
C doctor and a relative or carer of a patient whom he had killed would, I think, have acted
as a real deterrent to Shipman. If, despite the possible consequences, he had taken the
risk of killing, I am confident that the chances of his being detected would have been
increased. The kind of report that Dr Linda Reynolds made to the Coroner in March 1998
might have been made earlier and with much greater attendant detail. I cannot say when
this would have happened, but I think it likely that, had relatives and carers been
questioned, that would have led to Shipman’s detection at some stage, whereas the
system, as operated, never did.
The Role of the Medical Referee
53. The crematorium medical referee is an experienced doctor, but carries out what is
essentially a paper exercise. He or she is required to examine the cremation forms and
ascertain that they are in order and that the enquiry made by the doctors completing the
forms has been adequate. Before authorising a cremation, the medical referee must be
satisfied that the cause of death has been definitely ascertained. He or she may make any
enquiry that s/he may think necessary and may, in certain circumstances, order an
autopsy or refer a case to the coroner. In fact, very few cases are subjected to autopsy or
referred to the coroner as a result of action on the part of medical referees.
54. There are two schools of thought about what the task of the medical referee should entail.
Some medical referees believe that they are required to make an essentially clerical check
to ensure that the forms have been properly completed and that the causes of death
stated on Forms B and C are the same. They are not required, they say, to consider the
content of the forms or to seek to discover whether the picture presented makes medical
11
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
sense. Other medical referees take the view that their statutory duty requires them to
scrutinise the forms with a view to seeing whether the picture created by them hangs
together and makes medical sense.
55. It is not entirely surprising that there should be variability in practice among medical
referees. They operate in isolation from each other and receive no training and little
guidance, save that which is provided locally. There are no monitoring or audit
procedures. The Home Office has in the past had little direct contact with medical
referees, save when attempting to resolve a specific difficulty or request for advice.
56. In my view, it is clear that a clerical check cannot be the task that was envisaged when the
procedures were devised. It must have been intended that the medical referee should
make a medical judgement about the content of the forms and the consistency of the
stated cause of death with the information contained in them. Even so, the medical
referee’s task is very limited. The completed forms contain inadequate information to
enable the medical referee to gain a clear picture of the events leading up to the death.
Form B does not require the doctor to provide even a brief account of the deceased’s
medical history, nor much information about the circumstances of the death. The task of
the medical referee does not involve any independent investigation. The system is based
upon trust in the truthfulness and integrity of those taking part in the procedure. In
particular, the medical referee is dependent on the integrity of the Form B doctor.
57. In summary, it seems to me that the role of the medical referee is of limited value, even
when the duties are carried out, as they often are, most conscientiously. When the role is
limited to that of a clerical check, it is completely without value.
The Role of the Home Office
58. It has been known for over 50 years that the system of cremation certification was not
working as it was intended. As I have already explained, no significant changes to the
system were made; in particular, no steps were taken to strengthen the system or to
ensure that the procedures worked as had been originally intended. Given that the Home
Office had responsibility for keeping under consideration the need for changes to
cremation legislation, I have had to consider whether the Home Office has properly
discharged that responsibility.
59. I have concluded that, given the view of the Brodrick Committee that the risk of secret
homicide was negligible and that the cremation procedures should be abolished, it is not
possible to criticise the Home Office, whether in the years before the Brodrick Committee
reported, or in the period immediately afterwards, for any failure to strengthen the
cremation certification procedures. In the period after the Committee reported, it was
hoped and intended that abolition would be effected and I can well understand therefore
why strengthening the procedures was not a priority.
60. However, I consider that those Home Office officials responsible for cremation matters
over the years are to be criticised for their general lack of awareness of how the cremation
certification system was operating throughout the country. The Home Office should have
had a policy for the selection of medical referees; it should have provided training and
12
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
support for them once appointed. It should have maintained contact with them and
ensured that they had contact with each other. Had the Home Office taken these steps,
officials should have been aware that different practices were followed at different
crematoria; they should have known that, at some crematoria, an affirmative answer was
required to one of questions 5–8 of Form C and they should have found out why this was
so. They might then have realised that a requirement that the Form C doctor should
question someone other than the Form B doctor would strengthen the protective effect of
the procedures. It is possible that they might have considered introducing such a
requirement. However, in view of the fact that they believed that the cremation procedures
were valueless, they might have rejected the idea. Even if they had proposed a significant
strengthening of the Form C procedure, such a proposal would certainly have aroused
strong objections. In the circumstances, I do not think that Home Office officials could
have been criticised had they failed to pursue their proposal with all the vigour and
determination that would have been necessary to overcome such objections.
61. In the circumstances, I do not consider that there is any ground on which the Home Office
can be held responsible for the failure of the cremation certification system to detect
Shipman’s course of criminal conduct.
62. In my view, the cremation certification procedure, as presently carried out in most places,
is of very little value. I am recommending a new system of death certification for all deaths,
whether followed by burial or cremation. If that recommendation is implemented, the
current cremation certification system will no longer be required.
The Hyde Form C Doctors
63. The Inquiry has considered whether those doctors who undertook the duty of completing
most of Shipman’s Forms C (‘the Hyde doctors’) should be criticised for their performance
in connection with the completion of Forms C for Shipman’s patients. I had to consider, in
relation to each Hyde doctor, whether there were numbers or patterns of deaths or unusual
– possibly recurrent – features of the deaths that should have been noticed and acted
upon by him/her. I also had to consider whether, by checking what Shipman had written
on Form B, the Hyde doctors should have noticed any unusual features, or inconsistencies
between what Shipman had written and what he had told them.
64. When giving evidence to the Inquiry, the Hyde doctors related how, when they were to
complete a Form C for Shipman, he would visit them in their surgery and would give a very
full account of the deceased person’s medical history and the events leading up to the
death. Shipman was a plausible historian and gave a full and persuasive account of
events. The Form C doctor would not see the medical records. However, s/he would see
the Form B, examine the deceased’s body and complete and sign Form C. It does not
appear that the doctors always read Form B carefully, as some failed to observe strikingly
unusual features or inconsistencies in the forms. I think that most of them carried out their
examination of the body in a cursory way although, even had they made a careful
examination of the body of a patient whom Shipman had killed, it would have revealed no
cause for suspicion.
13
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
65. In my judgement, the general approach of the Hyde doctors to their Form C role, like that
of a large proportion of doctors practising elsewhere in the country, was not appropriate.
The purpose of the Form C doctor is that s/he should seek to reach an independent opinion
as to the cause of death. Doctors should not merely accept and endorse the view of the
Form B doctor. They should carry out a careful examination of the body and they should
not adopt the practice of never making enquiries of third parties. However, I observe that
the profession as a whole was never instructed to change the practices that were
commonly adopted. It would not be fair to single the Hyde doctors out for criticism on
account of their general approach to the task.
66. I considered the conduct of each of the Hyde doctors individually, applying the standard
of the reasonable, competent and conscientious general practitioner. As a result of that
exercise, I have been critical, to a greater or lesser extent, of six out of the ten doctors
concerned. It is not possible to explain adequately the reasons for my conclusions about
the performance of each individual doctor within the confines of this Summary. My
analysis of their roles is set out in Chapter Fifteen. The poor performance of the six doctors
I have referred to above is mitigated, although not entirely excused, by the generally low
standard of Form C completion prevailing throughout the profession.
67. Even if, in the cases in which I have criticised a doctor for signing a particular Form C, the
doctor had queried the propriety of Shipman’s decision to certify the cause of death, I do
not think that would have led to his detection. I think it likely that Shipman would have
claimed that he had spoken to the coroner, who had approved the cause of death. Distrust
of Shipman would not have been such as to cause the Form C doctor to verify the truth of
that statement. However, if this had happened regularly, it would or should have
attracted notice.
68. It is clear that the Form C procedure, as operated in this country for many decades, has
been wholly inadequate as a safeguard against concealed wrongdoing by a Form B
doctor. By wrongdoing, I mean, not only homicide, but also negligence and neglect. It is
clear that any system which depends on the integrity of one doctor is open to abuse by
that doctor, if s/he is dishonest.
69. It is a matter of regret that the Hyde doctors have still not changed their practice in relation
to completion of Forms C, despite their knowledge of the way in which the system can be
abused by an unscrupulous doctor.
The Dukinfield Crematorium Medical Referees
70. The Inquiry examined the work of the two doctors who were employed as medical referees
at the Dukinfield crematorium during the years when Shipman killed so many of his
patients. Dr Betty Hinchliffe was Deputy Medical Referee from the late 1970s until 1989,
when she became Medical Referee, and Dr Jane Holme was Deputy Medical Referee
from about 1989. Both retired in 1999.
71. Dr Hinchliffe and Dr Holme had worked in the field of child health for most of their
professional careers and had very little experience relevant to their work as medical
referees, especially in the care and treatment of the elderly. Both had little experience of
14
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
completing cremation forms. In my view, neither Dr Hinchliffe nor Dr Holme was
adequately equipped by her professional experience for the work of a medical referee.
This was not their fault. It was the fault of the system that permitted them to be appointed,
despite their lack of relevant experience.
72. In oral evidence, Dr Holme told the Inquiry that she believed that her task was essentially
to carry out a clerical check of the cremation forms. She did not consider that she should
review the medical opinions expressed by the Form B and Form C doctors. She had never
queried a cause of death. Nor had she ever ordered an autopsy or referred a death to the
coroner.
73. By contrast, Dr Hinchliffe told the Inquiry that, in looking at the cremation forms, she
assessed the whole picture and tried to fill in ‘a little jigsaw puzzle’. In other words, she
was suggesting that she exercised a degree of medical judgement. I regret to say that I
was unable to accept that evidence for reasons which I have explained fully in Chapter
Sixteen. I am satisfied that, like her colleague, Dr Hinchliffe carried out what was
essentially a clerical check of the cremation forms only. Dr Hinchliffe too had never
ordered an autopsy or referred a death to the coroner.
74. I am reluctant to criticise Dr Hinchliffe and Dr Holme for believing that their task was of an
essentially clerical nature because this mistaken belief was not uncommon and there was
no training or guidance by which such a mistaken belief could be corrected. However, I
would have thought that the application of common sense to the words of the Cremation
Regulations (particularly the power to order an autopsy) should have suggested to them
that the task required the exercise of some degree of medical judgement and was
intended to be more than a clerical exercise. I can only conclude that, like many of their
colleagues, they never paused to consider the underlying purpose of the work of a
medical referee, nor why, if that purpose were clerical in nature, the work had to be
undertaken by an experienced medical practitioner.
75. Dr Hinchliffe authorised the cremation of the bodies of 176 of Shipman’s patients;
Shipman had killed 107 of those patients. The figures must be seen in the context of the
total number (about 2000 a year) of deaths that Dr Hinchliffe processed. I am satisfied that
neither the number nor the distribution of the deaths of Shipman’s patients scrutinised by
Dr Hinchliffe was so unusual that she should have found them noteworthy. Dr Holme dealt
with only 31 deaths certified by Shipman over a period of eight years. There was nothing
about the numbers to draw Shipman to her attention.
76. Had Dr Hinchliffe or Dr Holme undertaken an assessment of the whole picture presented
by the cremation forms, they would have found some (in Dr Hinchliffe’s case, many) Forms
B in which the information provided by Shipman was inadequate or inconsistent. For
Dr Hinchliffe, in particular, this would have meant that it was quite often necessary for her
to speak to him to clarify the picture. She would have found it necessary to speak to him
considerably more frequently than she had to speak to other general practitioners. Had
Dr Hinchliffe assessed the whole picture, and had she had the benefit of a more
appropriate medical background, she would have realised that there were unusual
features among the deaths of Shipman’s patients.
15
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
77. Whilst the performance of Dr Hinchliffe and, to a lesser extent, Dr Holme fell short of that
which might have been expected from the best of their colleagues, I conclude that it is
unlikely to have been significantly different from that of many other medical referees in
England and Wales. In mitigation of their performance, they had not been given any formal
training or even provided with a handbook of advice. The only instruction available had
been provided by the previous medical referee. There was no contact with medical
referees from other areas. Furthermore, the circumstances in which the task was
performed, especially the pressure created by timing, encouraged the feeling that the job
was a straightforward clerical exercise with the minimum of enquiry needed.
78. Even had Dr Hinchliffe or Dr Holme questioned Shipman, it is likely that he would have
been able to proffer an explanation in any given case which would have satisfied them,
just as it must already have satisfied the Form C doctor. However, had there been a
repeated need to contact Shipman and to ask similar questions in relation to cases with
similar characteristics, this might well have led to concerns about his competence to
complete the forms, possibly about his competence as a doctor and possibly even as to
his honesty. Repeated questions directed at him might have acted to deter him from
pursuing his criminal activities. However, he might just have modified his form-filling
techniques so as to ensure that his deaths passed through the system without question.
Even had the medical referees exercised their power to order an autopsy, or referred a
death to the coroner for him to do so, it would not have revealed evidence of criminal
activity in the absence of toxicological tests.
79. In short, I doubt very much that, even if the medical referees had performed their duties
in a more critical manner, the course of Shipman’s killing would have been changed.
Coroners
The Existing Coronial System and Coroners’ Jurisdiction
80. According to the Home Office, there are 115 coroners in England and Wales, of whom 23
are full-time. Coroners may have a legal or a medical qualification; the vast majority are
legally qualified. The coroner service is funded by local authorities, who are also
responsible for appointing coroners. The resources available to coroners (even full-time
coroners) in terms of office and court premises, staff and office equipment vary widely.
Part-time coroners combine their coronial duties with practice, usually as a doctor or
solicitor, often discharging their duties from their practice premises. Some carry out their
duties from home.
81. Until recently, there was virtually no training for coroners. Recently, the Home Office
began to provide some training. However, it is not compulsory and some coroners do not
avail themselves of it. Many coroners, particularly part-time coroners, have little contact
with their colleagues and operate in virtual isolation. In the past, they have received little
advice or guidance. There is no leadership structure. The only challenge to a coroner’s
decision is by way of judicial review which is rare; there is no appellate body offering
regular guidance on the interpretation of the relevant statutory provisions. As a
consequence of all these factors, there is considerable variability of practice and
standards in different coroner’s districts.
16
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
82. It would be desirable to achieve a measure of consistency of practice and of high
standards. To achieve these ends, there is a need for leadership, organisation and
structure in the work of coroners. Coroners must also receive continuing education and
training.
83. Some functions of a coroner (such as the conduct of inquests) require legal knowledge
and experience. Others (such as the judgement whether a death is or is not due to a
natural disease process) require medical expertise. At present, there are few coroner’s
offices where both legal and medical expertise is available on a day-to-day basis. Usually,
the available expertise is legal only.
84. A coroner can act only if and when a death is reported to him/her. In 2001, 37.8% of all
registered deaths were reported to coroners; most reports (95.7% in 2001) were by
doctors. Coroners receive no information about deaths that are not reported to them. They
are dependent on others to report deaths. I have already drawn attention to the present
unsatisfactory arrangements whereby doctors decide whether or not to report deaths to
the coroner. I have also described the difficulty which registrars experience in identifying
those cases which should be reported. As Shipman has shown, it is possible for a doctor
to evade the coronial system almost completely. A way must be found to ensure that all
deaths receive a degree of scrutiny and investigation appropriate to their facts and
circumstances.
85. When a report of a death is made, the coroner must make a decision as to whether the
death falls within his/her jurisdiction, i.e. whether the death falls within one of the
categories of deaths in respect of which s/he is obliged by statute to hold an inquest.
These categories comprise deaths where there is reasonable cause to suspect that the
death was ‘violent’ or ‘unnatural’ or was sudden and of unknown cause or occurred whilst
the deceased person was in custody. The coroner might decide that the death falls within
his/her jurisdiction, in which case s/he will proceed to investigate the death in preparation
for an inquest, or to order an autopsy which might make an inquest unnecessary.
Alternatively, the coroner might decide that the death does not fall within his/her
jurisdiction, in which case s/he will take no action to investigate the death.
86. In my view, there are grounds for concern about the soundness of the decisions taken by
some coroners and coroner’s staff as to whether the coroner has jurisdiction. These
decisions are very important as they will determine whether or not an individual death is
to be subjected to any ‘official’ investigation. If the coroner does not assume jurisdiction,
burial can follow without any further check being made. If the deceased is to be cremated,
the death is still unlikely to be subjected to any significant investigation.
87. In my view, many decisions on jurisdiction are taken far too informally. The person
reporting the death (usually a doctor) is not required to put anything in writing or produce
any extract from the medical records. The coroner should receive written information
about the circumstances of the death and the deceased’s medical history in order to
inform his/her decision on jurisdiction.
88. The decision as to jurisdiction is, in general, taken on the basis only of what the reporting
doctor says. The coroner or a member of the coroner’s staff takes what the doctor says
17
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
completely on trust. In general, no attempt will be made to verify the accuracy of the
information given by the doctor from any other source. Nor will any attempt be made to
speak to a relative of the deceased. In my view, such decisions should be based upon a
broader knowledge of the death. Information provided by the person reporting the death
should be cross-checked with a member of the deceased’s family or some other person
with recent knowledge of the deceased. If appropriate, other enquiries should be made.
89. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that many decisions about jurisdiction are
taken by untrained staff without the medical knowledge necessary to equip them to do so
and without any proper understanding of the correct statutory tests to be applied. The
evidence suggests that, on occasions, they are influenced, whether deliberately or not, by
extraneous matters. Even when coroners themselves take the decisions, they may not
have the necessary medical knowledge to understand the issues and may in any event
be reliant on information taken by a member of staff with no understanding of those issues.
In my view, decisions of this kind should be taken by medically qualified coroners or, in
the more straightforward cases, by coroner’s officers with some medical background and
ready access to expert medical advice.
Greater Manchester South District
90. Shipman’s practice in Hyde fell within the coronial District of Greater Manchester South.
Once his activities became known, there was some public disquiet that they had not
earlier come to the knowledge of the Coroner for the District, Mr John Pollard. It was
therefore necessary for the Inquiry to examine the practices within his office and to
ascertain whether the fact that Shipman’s activities had not come to his attention resulted
from any fault on his part or that of his staff.
91. The procedures within Mr Pollard’s office have been subjected to close scrutiny by the
Inquiry. As a result, concerns have arisen about practices in operation in the office. Those
concerns relate in particular to the way in which decisions, particularly decisions on
jurisdiction, were made. I have also expressed concern about the extent to which
members of his staff were authorised to make decisions on his behalf. I am not critical of
individual members of staff, who had received no training and were no doubt doing their
very best to discharge their duties in difficult circumstances. Nor am I very critical of
Mr Pollard himself. He too had little training and suffered from the disadvantages of lack
of leadership and guidance which I have described. I do not think that the practices within
his office were any different from those in operation in many other coroners’ offices up and
down the country.
92. Most importantly, I doubt that the practices in operation in Mr Pollard’s office had any
effect on the outcome of those few deaths referred to him where Shipman had killed. It is
possible that, if the practices followed in the office had been better, the outcome might
have been different in those cases (we do not know how many since records would not
necessarily have been kept) in which Shipman spoke to the coroner’s office and
‘discussed’ a death. For example, in the case of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, a coroner’s officer
or clerk/typist might have spoken to Mrs Grundy’s daughter, Mrs Angela Woodruff, before
giving ‘permission’ for Shipman to certify the death as due to ‘old age’. However, the
18
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
practice in the coroner’s office can have had no effect on the vast majority of the killings,
which never came to the Coroner’s notice at all.
Coroner’s Officers
93. The functions of coroner’s officers vary from district to district. Some fulfil an investigative
role. Others are office-bound. Most are serving or former police officers. Others come from
a variety of different employment backgrounds, including nursing and paramedic. Some
are employed by the police and others by local authorities. Until recently, when the
Coroner’s Officers Association began to organise and fund it, no training for coroner’s
officers was available. Even now, those coroners whose officers are employed by the
police cannot insist on their attending the training courses which are available.
94. The service provided by coroner’s officers is currently of variable quality. For too long, they
have been expected to perform tasks requiring the application of skills which they do not
possess and in which they have not been trained. Coroners must have the support of a
team of investigators, preferably drawn from a wider variety of employment backgrounds
than at present. The coroner should be able to direct and manage their work and working
conditions. The investigators will require appropriate training. Other staff will supply the
necessary administrative support.
The Police as Coroner’s Officers
95. Under the present system, the police are frequently summoned to the scene of a death
which has occurred in the community. If it appears to the police officer attending that there
are circumstances suggestive of criminal involvement in the death, a police investigation
will be set in motion. If there are no such circumstances and if it appears to the officer that
there is a doctor willing and able to issue an MCCD, police involvement usually ceases
immediately. If, however, there appears to be no doctor willing and able to issue an
MCCD, the death must be reported to the coroner.
96. In that event, the function of the police officer changes and, thereafter, s/he acts in the
capacity of a coroner’s officer. In that capacity, s/he will carry out a limited preliminary
investigation of the circumstances of the death and complete one or more sudden death
report forms, recording the information obtained. Police officers sometimes carry out this
same function following the report of a death to the coroner by others – for example,
doctors and registrars.
97. The Inquiry examined samples of sudden death report forms completed by officers of the
Greater Manchester Police (GMP). These revealed very variable standards of
investigation and reporting. It was clear that the officers often had no idea why the death
had been reported to the coroner or what issues the coroner would have to decide. Thus,
the information contained on the forms did not focus on the issues of real relevance to any
subsequent coroner’s investigation. It was accepted on behalf of the GMP that the
standard of investigation and reporting of deaths on behalf of the coroner was very
variable. An individual officer might complete such forms only once or twice a year.
Procedures that are not practised frequently are unlikely to be conducted to as
consistently high a standard as those that are performed often.
19
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
98. Although I am critical of the standard of investigation and reporting by the GMP, I am
satisfied that none of the shortcomings that I have identified resulted in Shipman escaping
detection for killings which might have been revealed had officers acted differently. I
should say also that I heard criticism of the standards of investigation and reporting by
officers of other police forces besides the GMP.
99. It appears to me that there are several reasons why police officers should no longer be
involved in the investigation of deaths that do not give rise to any suspicion of crime. First,
they do not have the skills or expertise necessary for the job. It is clear that many enquiries
to be made on a coroner’s behalf will involve medical issues and I am satisfied that a police
officer with no medical knowledge is not an appropriate person to undertake them. Such
enquiries also involve dealing with the recently bereaved, which many police officers
are not used to and find difficult. Furthermore, the task of attending such deaths is
time-consuming and places a heavy burden on limited police resources. Understandably,
perhaps, many police officers do not regard attendance at such deaths as an appropriate
use of their skills or their time.
100. In my view, what is needed is a person specially trained to investigate non-suspicious
deaths. The usual role of the police should be limited to the investigation of those deaths
where there is some reason to suspect crime. My proposal will be that the investigation of
non-suspicious deaths should be carried out by the coroner’s investigators to whom I have
already referred.
Coroners’ Investigations and Inquests
101. Once the coroner decides that s/he has jurisdiction over a death reported to him/her, the
coroner will carry out an investigation into the death. Only two of the deaths of Shipman’s
victims, those of Mrs Renate Overton and Mr Charles Barlow, were subjected to a
coroner’s investigation. For reasons which I have set out in Chapters Nine and Thirteen,
both investigations resulted in the deaths being wrongly attributed to ‘natural causes’. The
fact that those investigations had failed to reveal that Mrs Overton and Mr Barlow had
been unlawfully killed raised the possibility that there might be more general deficiencies
in the methods of investigation adopted by coroners. The Inquiry examined some of the
ways in which coroners investigate deaths and the investigative tools at their disposal.
102. At present, once a coroner accepts jurisdiction in respect of a death, a subsequent
decision to order an autopsy is almost automatic, without any other preliminary
investigation. This immediate resort to autopsy results from the legislation. In my view, it
is undesirable. An autopsy should be conducted only when there is a positive reason to
do so; the decision should not be taken ‘by default’. The coroner should have available to
him/her a wider range of investigative methods and should be provided with the
necessary powers to enable him/her to make full use of those methods.
103. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that, sometimes, the autopsy is not the
definitive source of information it is often thought to be. Some coroners’ autopsies are
seriously deficient. The pathologist may have inadequate information about the death. He
or she may not have the medical records or the opportunity to speak to the clinicians
responsible for the deceased person’s care. Pressure of time may mean that the autopsy
20
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
is conducted too quickly and best practice may not be followed. Sometimes, coroners will
not give permission for samples to be taken for histology, when the pathologist thinks it
necessary. The pathologist may feel under pressure to find a natural cause of death.
Sometimes, pathologists are tempted – or persuaded – to go beyond their expertise in
ascribing a death to ‘natural causes’ when they do not have all the relevant information.
104. When available, the autopsy report is often viewed in isolation. The coroner is likely to know
little about the circumstances of the death or the deceased person’s medical history. He or
she will have no witness statements and no medical records. In the absence of any wider
evidential background against which to view the autopsy report, a coroner is almost
bound to accept it at face value. Nor do most coroners have the medical expertise
necessary to subject the report to any critical examination.
105. My overall impression is that there is in the minds of the coroners and some of the
pathologists about whose practices I heard an expectation that, if a death is not
immediately identified as ‘suspicious’, it will be found to be due to natural causes. It is
easy to see how this attitude can become entrenched. The great majority of deaths will, in
fact, be natural. However, if a coroner’s investigation is to be effective, there must be an
ever-present readiness to keep in mind the possibility that the death might not have been
natural. Quite apart from any question of homicide, the coroner should bear in mind the
possibility that neglect, accident or medical error might have caused or contributed to
the death. Otherwise, the expectation that the death will be ‘natural’ may become a
self-fulfilling prophecy.
106. Following autopsy, if the cause of death is not certified on the basis of the cause of death
given in the autopsy report, some investigations will be undertaken prior to the inquest.
The detailed evidence which the Inquiry received about such investigations came
primarily from the Greater Manchester South District. That evidence suggested that
investigations were unfocussed and lacked co-ordination by a person who understood
the issues and had access to all the available information. A particular problem arose in
the investigation of cases involving the possibility of medical error or neglect which might
have caused or contributed to the death. Such investigations require particular expertise
and the availability of specialist skills.
107. There is, in my view, an urgent need for a more focussed, professional and consistent
approach to coroners’ investigations; this is needed from the time that the death is
reported, right up to the verdict at inquest. There needs to be clarity as to the purpose and
scope of the enquiries that are made. Coroners themselves, who are to direct the conduct
of an investigation, require training. Legal experience, particularly as a solicitor, should
provide a sound basis for the conduct of an investigation into non-medical matters, but it is
apparent from the evidence that medical knowledge and experience is vital for the proper
conduct of many investigations, as well as for the proper evaluation of evidence and the
taking of decisions.
108. In the course of the Inquiry, I have become aware of the widespread concern about the
number of inquests held and the way in which many inquests are conducted. I have
considered the issue of inquests only briefly because, in the event, no death of a victim of
21
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Shipman was the subject of an inquest until after Shipman had been convicted of murder
in January 2000.
109. In 2001, inquests were held into nearly 25,800 deaths in England and Wales; that figure
represents 13% of all deaths reported to coroners and nearly 5% of all registered deaths.
Inquests are held into a far larger proportion of deaths in England and Wales than in other
jurisdictions which the Inquiry examined.
110. Although some jurisdictions manage without inquests altogether, I think there are positive
reasons to have inquests, provided that they are thorough and well conducted. There are
cases in which the holding of an inquest will result in positive public health and public
safety benefits. Also, where issues of public concern arise, an inquest can expose failings
or engender confidence.
111. At present, it is not easy for coroners to decide whether a particular death falls within one
of those categories of death which by statute require an inquest. There is a general
perception that the existing categories do not include all deaths that give rise to public
concern. Equally, there is a feeling that some deaths which do fall within the categories
give rise to no issue of particular public interest or concern. In short, the means of selecting
those deaths where the public interest requires an inquest is not satisfactory and requires
change.
112. In the modern era, the purposes of the public inquest should be to conduct a public
investigation into deaths which have or might have resulted from an unlawful act or
unlawful acts, to inform interested bodies and the public at large about deaths which give
rise to issues relating to public safety, public health and the prevention of avoidable death
and injury, and to provide public scrutiny of those deaths that occur in circumstances in
which there exists the possibility of an abuse of power.
113. In many cases, nothing is gained by the hearing of evidence in public. Indeed, in many
cases, such exposure amounts to an unwarranted invasion of privacy and only causes
increased distress to the bereaved. In my opinion, the public inquest should be limited to
those deaths about which there is a real public ‘need to know’. In all other cases, the end
product of a coroner’s investigation would be a written report. I would confine inquests to
deaths where the particular circumstances are such that the public interest requires a
public hearing. I suggest that, apart from a few types of situation in which an inquest
should be mandatory (such as cases of homicide not followed by conviction and deaths in
custody), the coroner should have discretion to decide (after consultation with interested
parties) whether a public inquest should be held in that individual case or group of cases.
The decision should be subject to appeal, not only by relatives of the deceased, but also
by anyone with a legitimate interest in the case. Coroners should receive guidance on the
types of issue that will require a public investigation at inquest.
114. I also consider that the procedure by which coroners can make recommendations for
future change should be continued, but strengthened.
The Death of Mrs Renate Overton
115. Following investigation of Mrs Overton’s death during Phase One, I found that Shipman
had deliberately given her an overdose of diamorphine (or possibly morphine), intending
22
SHIP03$$10 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
to kill her. In the event, she survived, in a persistent vegetative state, for 14 months before
her death in April 1995. I was concerned to investigate precisely how the post-death
procedures had operated in her case. The detailed results of that investigation are set out
in Chapter Thirteen.
116. I have found that the performance of Dr David Bee, the consultant pathologist who carried
out the autopsy in Mrs Overton’s case, was seriously deficient. His autopsy report
provided no underlying cause of death and he should have made it clear that he was
unable to do so. Instead, he gave an unfounded opinion that the death was due to natural
causes. I have also criticised the then Coroner for Greater Manchester South District,
Mr Peter Revington, for his decision, based on manifestly inadequate information, not to
hold an inquest.
117. The events of this case vividly illustrate the shortcomings of the systems for the
investigation of deaths in operation in the office of the Coroner for Greater Manchester
South District at the material time and lend strong support to the conclusions which I have
expressed above about the inadequacy of coroners’ investigations generally.
Proposals for Change
118. It is clear from the evidence I have received that the current arrangements for death and
cremation certification and the coronial system require radical change. I have set out my
proposals for that change in the following section.
23
SHIP03PSUM 25-06-03 11:25:01 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Future of the Coronial System
1. The coronial system should be retained, but in a form entirely different from at present.
There must be radical reform and a complete break with the past, as to organisation,
philosophy, sense of purpose and mode of operation. (paragraphs 19.10–19.12)
The Aim and Purposes of the New Coroner Service
2. The aim of the new Coroner Service should be to provide an independent, cohesive
system of death investigation and certification, readily accessible to and understood by
the public. It should seek to establish the cause of every death and to record the formal
details accurately, for the purposes of registration and the collection of mortality statistics.
It should seek to meet the needs and expectations of the bereaved. Its procedures should
be designed to detect cases of homicide, medical error and neglect. It should provide a
thorough and open investigation of all deaths giving rise to public concern. It should
ensure that the knowledge gained from death investigation is applied for the prevention
of avoidable death and injury in the future. (paragraphs 19.13–19.14)
The Need for Leadership, Training and Expertise in the Coroner Service
3. The Coroner Service should provide leadership, training and guidance for coroners, with
the aim of achieving consistency of practice and a high quality of service throughout the
country. (paragraph 19.15)
4. The Coroner Service requires medical, legal and investigative expertise.
(paragraph 19.16)
5. Many of the functions currently carried out by coroners (who, in the main, have a legal
qualification only) require the exercise of medical judgement. Some of those functions
(and others which I am recommending) require legal expertise. In the future, those
functions should be carried out respectively by a medical coroner and a judicial coroner.
Both the medical and judicial coroners should be independent office-holders under the
Crown. (paragraphs 19.17–19.19)
6. The Coroner Service should have a corps of trained investigators, who would be the
mainstays of the new system. The coroner’s investigator would replace the coroner’s
officer but have a greatly enhanced role. More routine functions, at present performed by
coroner’s officers, would be performed instead by administrative staff.
(paragraph 19.20)
Structure and Organisation of the Coroner Service
Central Organisation
7. The Coroner Service must be, and must be seen to be, independent of Government and
of all other sectional interests. It should not be administered, therefore, from within a
Government Department. Instead, it should be a body at ‘arm’s length’ from Government,
25
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
that is an Executive Non-Departmental Public Body (ENDPB). Such bodies are formed in
association with, but are independent of, the Government Department through which they
are answerable to Parliament. Ideally, the Coroner Service should be associated with both
the Department for Constitutional Affairs and the Department of Health (in Wales, the
National Health Service Wales Department of the National Assembly for Wales).
(paragraphs 19.21–19.25)
8. The Coroner Service should be governed by a Board. Among the Board’s responsibilities
would be the formulation of policy, the strategic direction of the Service and the promotion
of public education about such matters as the work of the Coroner Service and
bereavement services. Three of the members of the Board would be the Chief Judicial
Coroner, the Chief Medical Coroner and the Chief Coroner’s Investigator, each of whom
would be responsible for leading his/her respective branch of the Service.
(paragraphs 19.26–19.30)
9. The Service should also have an Advisory Council, the function of which would be to
provide policy advice on all issues. (paragraph 19.31)
Regional and District Organisation
10. The Coroner Service should be administered through a regional and district structure, with
a regional medical coroner and at least one judicial coroner assigned to each region.
There might also be a regional investigator. There would be ten regions in England and
Wales, coinciding with the ten administrative regions. (paragraph 19.32)
11. Each region should be divided into between three and seven districts, each with a
population of about a million. Each district office would have a medical coroner, one
(possibly more than one) deputy medical coroner (who might work part-time), a team of
coroner’s investigators and a small administrative staff. The staff would operate a service
outside the usual office hours. (paragraph 19.34)
12. The Coroner Service should have jurisdiction over every death that occurs in England and
Wales and over every dead body brought within the boundaries. Jurisdiction should not
depend upon a report being made or upon the need for an inquest. A death should be
investigated in the district office most convenient in all the circumstances.
(paragraph 19.32)
Death Certification
13. There should be one system of death certification applicable to all deaths, whether the
death is to be followed by burial or cremation. (paragraph 19.36)
14. There should be a requirement that the fact that a death has occurred should be confirmed
and certified. (paragraph 19.41)
The New Forms
15. The basis for the certification system would be the completion of two forms. The first
(Form 1) would provide an official record of the fact and circumstances of death. It would be
26
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
completed by the person (a doctor, an accredited nurse or paramedic or a trained and
accredited coroner’s investigator) who had confirmed the fact that death had occurred.
The second form (Form 2) would be completed by the doctor who had treated the
deceased person during the last illness or, if no doctor had treated the deceased in the
recent past, by the deceased’s usual medical practitioner. Form 2 would contain a brief
summary of the deceased person’s recent medical history and the chain of events leading
to death. The doctor completing the form would have the option of expressing an opinion
as to the cause of death. To be eligible to complete Form 2, a doctor should be registered in
the UK and have been in practice for four years since qualification.
(paragraphs 19.40–19.48)
The Duties of Doctors
16. A statutory duty to complete Form 2 should be imposed:
- in the case of a death occurring in hospital, upon the consultant responsible for the
care of the deceased at the time of the death. The duty would be satisfied if the form
were completed by a suitably qualified member of the consultant’s clinical team or
firm; and
- in the case of a death occurring other than in a hospital, upon the general practitioner
with whom the deceased had been registered. The duty would be satisfied if the form
were completed by another principal in the practice. If, in the future, patients were to
be registered with a general practice (rather than an individual general practitioner),
the statutory duty would lie upon all principals in the practice until fulfilled by one of
them. (paragraph 19.49)
17. The General Medical Council should impose upon doctors a professional duty to
co-operate with the death certification system, requiring them to provide an opinion as
to the cause of death on Form 2 in cases where it is appropriate to do so. A failure to
co-operate should be a disciplinary matter. (paragraph 19.51)
The Role of the Coroner Service
18. All deaths should be reported to the Coroner Service, which would take responsibility for
certification of the death and for deciding whether further investigation was necessary.
Deaths where the doctor completing Form 2 had expressed an opinion as to the cause of
death would be considered for certification by a coroner’s investigator after consultation
with the deceased’s family. All other deaths would go for further investigation by the
medical coroner. (paragraphs 19.58–19.65)
19. The Coroner Service would take primary responsibility for all post-death procedures. It
would relieve other agencies of some of the responsibilities that they presently carry in
connection with those procedures. (paragraphs 19.66–19.69)
Random and Targeted Checks
20. A proportion of all deaths certified by a coroner’s investigator on the basis of the opinion
of the Form 2 doctor should be selected randomly for fuller investigation at the discretion
of the medical coroner. This process of random investigations would itself be the subject
27
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
of audit. In addition, the Coroner Service should have the power to undertake targeted
investigations, both prospective and retrospective. (paragraphs 19.70–19.73)
Registration
21. A new certificate of cause of death should be designed for completion by a coroner’s
investigator or, where an investigation has been undertaken, by the medical coroner. If,
in the future, it becomes possible to register a death on-line, registration could on many
occasions be effected by the informant (with assistance) direct from the district coroner’s
office. (paragraphs 19.79–19.81)
Further Investigation
Criteria for Investigation
22. Coroner’s investigators should be trained to recognise the type of circumstances
which make it appropriate for a death to be investigated by the medical coroner. The
guidance given to investigators should permit flexibility and should be kept under
constant review. (paragraphs 19.83–19.86)
The End Product of Further Investigation
23. In general, there should be an inquest only in a case in which the public interest requires
a public investigation for reasons connected with the facts and circumstances of the
individual case. There should be a few quite narrow categories in which an inquest would
be mandatory. Otherwise, the decision whether the public interest required an inquest
would be for the judicial coroner and would be subject to appeal. I agree with many of the
views expressed in the recent Report of the Coroners Review relating to the outcome,
scope and conduct of inquests. (paragraph 19.87)
24. In other cases, the product of the further investigation of a death would be a report (written
by the medical or judicial coroner, occasionally by them both jointly) explaining how and
why the deceased died. The report should be primarily for the benefit of the family of the
deceased person, but should also be provided to any party or public body with a proper
interest in its receipt. (paragraph 19.88)
25. Any recommendation made by a judicial or medical coroner, whether in the course of an
inquest or a written report, should be submitted to the Chief Coroners. If they ratified it, they
would then be responsible for taking it forward at a high level, first by submitting it to the
appropriate body and then by pursuing that body until a satisfactory response had been
received and action taken. (paragraph 19.91)
Procedures for Investigation
26. The framework for the investigative procedures to be followed once a death had been
identified as requiring investigation would be for the Board of the Coroner Service to
determine. In any individual case, the course to be followed would be a matter for the
individual medical or judicial coroner to decide. (paragraph 19.92)
28
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
The Necessary Powers
27. The judicial coroner should be given powers to order entry and search of premises and
seizure of property and documents relevant to a death investigation. The medical coroner
should be given powers to order the seizure of medical records and drugs. The judicial
coroner should hear appeals from decisions of the medical coroner in relation to those
powers of seizure. (paragraph 19.95)
Investigation of the Medical Cause of Death
28. In cases where the medical cause of death is to be investigated, there should not be an
automatic resort to autopsy. The medical coroner, who would have responsibility for
establishing the cause of death, would have a variety of investigative tools at his/her
disposal. If the medical coroner were considering ordering an autopsy, the family of the
deceased person would be informed and an explanation of why the autopsy was
considered necessary would be given to them. There should be an opportunity for family
members to advance objections. If the medical coroner were to decide nevertheless that
an autopsy was necessary, the family should have a right to appeal the decision to the
judicial coroner. In a case where the medical coroner concludes that the cause of death
has been established and no further investigation is required, but the family is of the view
that there should be an autopsy, there should be a right to make representations to the
medical coroner and to appeal to the judicial coroner. (paragraphs 19.96–19.97)
29. In general, the medical coroner should seek to establish the cause of death to a high
degree of confidence. However, in an appropriate case, it should be open to a medical
coroner, provided that s/he has satisfied him/herself that there is no other reason why the
death should be investigated further, to certify the cause of death on the balance of
probabilities. In some cases, it might be appropriate for the medical coroner to certify that
the death was due to ‘unascertained natural disease process’. However, such a cause
should not be certified without toxicological screening of a blood or urine sample. The
medical coroner should be permitted, in an appropriate case, to certify that a death was
due to ‘old age’. (paragraphs 19.98–19.100)
30. Disposal of the body of a deceased person whose death is being investigated by the
Coroner Service should be permitted as soon as the body has been identified and a
decision has been taken that it will not be required for further investigations. If the medical
coroner is satisfied that the cause of death is known, but the investigation into the death
is not yet complete in other respects, s/he should inform the family and the register office
of that cause of death. If there remains any uncertainty about the cause of death, and that
uncertainty cannot be resolved until the circumstances have been fully investigated, the
medical coroner should, where possible, provide the register office with a provisional
cause of death. (paragraph 19.102).
Investigation by the Judicial Coroner
31. Judicial coroners who have to conduct inquests should be relieved of the day-to-day
responsibility for the pre-inquest investigation. They should direct the investigation, but
responsibility for the collection of evidence should devolve onto a legally qualified person
29
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
in the regional office. The judicial coroner should also have the assistance of that person
or, in the more complex cases, counsel to the inquest, who would present the evidence
and call the witnesses. (paragraph 19.105)
Criminal Cases and Deaths Investigated by Other Agencies
32. If criminal proceedings have been commenced, there should be no need for an inquest
to be opened and adjourned, as is the present practice. If the proceedings resulted in a
conviction, the medical coroner would usually need to do no more than write a report
recording the fact of the conviction, the cause of death and the brief circumstances of the
death. In a rare case, a public interest issue might arise, in which case an inquest would be
appropriate. If the proceedings led to acquittal, the death would be referred to the judicial
coroner for inquest. (paragraph 19.106)
33. If any other agency (such as the Health and Safety Executive) were to investigate a death,
the medical coroner would take no action, other than that necessary to establish the cause
of death. When the other agency’s investigation was complete, its report, together with the
result of the medical coroner’s investigation into the cause of death, would be sent to the
judicial coroner. The judicial coroner would then decide whether any further investigation
was required or whether an inquest should be held. If no inquest were to be held, the
judicial coroner would write a report. (paragraph 19.107)
Deaths Arising from Medical Error or Neglect
34. Deaths which were, or might be, caused or contributed to by medical error or neglect
should be investigated by the Coroner Service. Doctors should not be treated any
differently from others whose errors lead to death. At present, it appears that many cases
of medical error and neglect are not reported to or investigated by coroners. The coroner’s
conclusions would not be determinative of civil liability. The Coroner Service should study
the system of identifying and investigating cases of potential medical error being
developed in Victoria, Australia, with a view to introducing something of a similar nature in
this country. (paragraphs 19.108–19.109)
35. Cases of possible medical error or neglect should be investigated initially by the medical
coroner. If, following that investigation, it appeared to him/her that the death might have
been caused or contributed to by medical error or neglect, the case should be referred to
the regional coroner’s office for investigation by the regional medical coroner and judicial
coroner. (paragraph 19.110)
36. Cases of medical error or neglect transferred to the regional coroner’s office would be
investigated under the direction of a legally qualified person. There should be a small team
of coroner’s investigators at every regional office who can develop expertise in medical
cases. Appropriate expert opinions would be obtained. Further ideas for the investigation
of more complex medical cases should be considered with a view to a proper system of
investigation being devised. (paragraph 19.111)
30
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Pathology Services
Autopsies
37. All autopsies should be carried out to the standards recommended by the Royal College
of Pathologists in its document ‘Guidelines on autopsy practice’, published in September
2002. The content of a properly conducted autopsy should be formally recognised,
possibly by the production of a code of practice with statutory force. Pathologists should
be provided with improved background information about the deceased person’s medical
history and the circumstances of the death so that they can interpret their findings in
context. They should be free to carry out whatever special examinations they consider
necessary for the completion of a thorough and accurate autopsy report, provided that
there is proper medical justification for the conduct of those examinations.
(paragraph 19.119)
Toxicology
38. Greater use should be made of toxicology in the investigation of deaths of which the cause
is not immediately apparent. It should be the aim of medical coroners to move towards the
use of toxicology in virtually all autopsies and in some cases where no autopsy is
conducted. (paragraph 19.120)
Partial Autopsy
39. It should be possible for a medical coroner to authorise a partial autopsy. Any limitation
would have to be very clearly defined and would have to be subject to the stipulation that,
if the pathologist needs to go beyond what has been authorised, in order to reach a
satisfactory conclusion as to the cause of death, s/he should be free to do so.
(paragraph 19.121)
Retention of Organs and Tissues
40. Guidance on the issue of retention of organs and tissues following a coroner’s autopsy will
have to be provided for coroners by the Coroner Service. The medical coroner must have
the power to order retention of organs and tissues if such retention is necessary for the
purpose of his/her investigation. Families should have the same rights to object and
appeal as in respect of an autopsy. (paragraph 19.123)
The Provision of a Unified Pathology Service
41. There are strong arguments to suggest that the criminal justice system and the Coroner
Service would both be well served by a pathology service (including both forensic
pathologists and those histopathologists who conduct most coroners’ autopsies) which
operated under the auspices of a Special Health Authority. If such a pathology service
were to establish regional ‘centres of excellence’, this would fit well with the Inquiry’s
proposal for regional coroner’s offices. (paragraphs 19.124–19.125)
A Statutory Duty to Report Concerns about a Death
42. There should be a statutory duty on any ‘qualified’ or ‘responsible’ person to report to the
Coroner Service any concern relevant to the cause or circumstances of a death of which
31
SHIP03$$12 25-06-03 11:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PREC Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
s/he becomes aware in the course of his/her duties. The duty should be to report as soon
as practicable any information relating to a death believed by that person to be true and
which, if true, might amount to evidence of crime, malpractice or neglect.
(paragraph 19.126)
43. All relevant employers should encourage their employees to report any concerns relating
to the cause or circumstances of a death of which they become aware in the course of their
duties. Employers should ensure that such reports as are made to them are passed on to
the appropriate quarter without delay and without any possibility of the reporter being
subject to criticism or reprisal. (paragraph 19.127)
PublicEducation
44. The Coroner Service should seek to educate the public about the functions of the Service
and, at the same time, encourage members of the public to report any concerns about a
death. (paragraph 19.128)
Audit and Appeal
45. There should be systematic audit of every function of the medical and judicial coroners
and their investigators, save for those relating to the correctness of the decisions reached
by the coroners. (paragraphs 19.129–19.131)
46. Any decision made by a medical or judicial coroner would be subject to judicial review.
However, a quicker and cheaper means of appeal should be provided, whereby
decisions of the coroners that are wrong in law, plainly wrong on the facts, fail to set out
the facts found or fail to give reasons for the conclusions can be set aside. The Chief
Judicial Coroner should decide such appeals, if appropriate with the Chief Medical
Coroner acting as medical adviser. From his/her decision, there should be a statutory right
of appeal to the Divisional Court on a point of law only. (paragraph 19.132)
Transitional Arrangements
47. In the short term, changes to existing systems should be made. In particular, the
cremation certification procedures should be strengthened. A variety of steps could be
taken to improve practices in coroner’s offices. (paragraphs 19.134–19.140)
The Future
48. In 1971, the Brodrick Committee recommended wide-ranging changes to the current
systems of death and cremation certification and coroner investigations. Hardly any of
their proposals were implemented. As it happens, I do not think that implementation would
have prevented the Shipman tragedy. But, in many respects, the systems would have
been improved. Today, the systems do not meet the needs of society. There is a
groundswell of opinion in favour of change. It is to be hoped that the proposals of the
Coroners Review and of this Inquiry do not, as did those of the Brodrick Committee, end
in stalemate. (paragraph 19.142)
32
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER ONE
The Conduct of Phase Two, Stage Two of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
1.1 The Terms of Reference of the Inquiry relevant to the subject matter of Phase Two, Stage
Two (‘Stage Two’) are as follows:
‘... (b) to enquire into the actions of the statutory bodies, authorities,
other organisations and responsible individuals concerned in the
procedures and investigations which followed the deaths of those of
Harold Shipman’s patients who died in unlawful or suspicious
circumstances;’
and
‘... (d) following those enquiries, to recommend what steps, if any,
should be taken to protect patients in the future ...’.
The Subject Matter
1.2 During Stage Two, the Inquiry examined the procedures and investigations which follow,
or may follow, a death. Those procedures and investigations fall into the following
categories:
- verification of the fact that death has occurred
- certification of the cause of death
- in a case where the deceased is to be cremated, certification for the purpose of
cremation
- registration of the death
- reporting of certain deaths to the coroner
- investigation of reported deaths by the coroner, including medical investigation by
means of autopsy and other forms of pathological examination.
The Inquiry’s Approach
1.3 The Inquiry’s Terms of Reference specifically required me to enquire into the conduct of
those concerned in the events following the deaths of Shipman’s patients. Nevertheless,
it was plainly necessary for the Inquiry to obtain evidence of a more general nature,
showing how the post-death procedures worked in other parts of the country and how
those responsible for the operation of the procedures elsewhere carried out their duties.
This evidence of the ‘wider picture’was necessary for two reasons. First, it would provide
me with a benchmark against which to judge the actions of the organisations and
individuals responsible for dealing with the deaths of Shipman’s patients. Second, it would
assist me in judging whether it was the actions of those organisations and individuals
33
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
which enabled Shipman to kill for so long without detection or whether he was able to do
so because of inherent flaws in the procedures themselves.
1.4 Obtaining a true picture of how the various post-death procedures operate in other parts
of the country was not an easy matter. Plainly, given the time and resources available to
the Inquiry, there was no question of undertaking or commissioning large-scale research
into the operation of post-death procedures throughout the country. There are no
independent ‘experts’who can provide an overview of practice countrywide. The
procedures are operated by general practitioners, hospital doctors, crematorium medical
referees, registrars, coroners, coroners’staff and pathologists, each of whom carries out
the work in his/her own way, often isolated from others performing similar functions. There
is no objective means (at least without considerable research) of assessing who are the
‘best’and who are the ‘worst’performers in their particular field.
1.5 The Inquiry team therefore decided that the only practicable way of gaining a general
picture was to approach a number of practitioners and to obtain evidence from them about
how they carried out their work and about their perception of the systems that they were
required to operate. From that evidence, it was hoped that I would be able to gain an
insight into the working of the various post-death procedures. Evidence was also obtained
from many practitioners from the Tameside area.
1.6 Before the Stage Two hearings began, I visited the office of a local crematorium and spoke
to the crematorium medical referee. I also visited a register office, where I observed a
death being registered and spoke to the Superintendent Registrar and other registrars.
I went to a coroner’s office and met the Coroner. All the offices in question were entirely
unconnected with Shipman. The object of my visits was to gain some impression of the
day-to-day work undertaken at the offices by the personnel employed there. Insofar as the
discussions which took place during the course of those visits informed my thinking, I have
related them in the course of this Report.
The Evidence
Witness and Witness-Related Evidence
1.7 A total of 276 witness statements and about 36,000 pages of documents have been
scanned into the Inquiry’s image database in connection with Stage Two. That evidence
comes from the following sources.
Families
1.8 When providing their Inquiry witness statements for Phase One, the relatives of Shipman’s
patients were invited to give their suggestions for changes in the existing post-death
procedures, with a view to providing additional safeguards for the future. Many responded
to this invitation and put forward thoughtful and constructive suggestions as to how the
systems might be improved. I have considered those written suggestions and at the outset
of the Stage Two hearings, I heard oral evidence from 12 relatives of patients whom
Shipman had killed. I shall discuss that evidence further in Chapter Twelve.
34
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Doctors Responsible for Completing Medical Certificates of Cause of Death and Cremation
Forms B
1.9 In order to understand the processes of death and cremation certification, it was
necessary for me first to gain a full understanding of the practice and procedures relating
to the completion, by the attending doctor of a deceased person, of the medical certificate
of cause of death (MCCD) and cremation Form B.
1.10 Witness statements were obtained from six general practitioners of varying seniority,
dealing with their own practice when completing MCCDs and Forms B for their patients.
They were asked about the training which they had received in completing forms, the way
in which they approached the task and their interpretation of the forms. Four of the general
practitioners were former colleagues of Shipman (Dr John Dacre in Todmorden and Dr Ian
Napier, Dr Geoffrey Roberts and Dr John Smith at the Donneybrook Practice). The other
two were young practitioners who had no connection with Shipman. Five of the general
practitioners were or had been in practice in Hyde.
1.11 Dr Ian Morgan, a general practitioner and medical referee practising in Solihull, was also
asked to provide a witness statement dealing with his practice with regard to completing
MCCDs and cremation Forms B. He gave oral evidence about these issues. In order that
I might also understand the practice in hospital, witness statements were obtained from
representatives of two local hospitals, describing the procedures that are followed when
a death occurs.
1.12 The information contained on MCCDs is collected by the Office for National Statistics
(ONS) and used in the compilation of mortality and other statistics. A witness statement
was therefore obtained from Dr Cleone Rooney, a medical epidemiologist at the ONS,
explaining how the task of completing an MCCD should be undertaken.
Doctors Responsible for Completing Cremation Forms C
1.13 One of the issues I have had to consider was the role of the doctors who had confirmed
the cause of death certified by Shipman in cases where he had killed and the deceased
were cremated. I had to decide whether their conduct in signing Forms C in some or all
of those cases should be criticised. I have also had to assess the value of the cremation
certification system, both as it was intended by Parliament and as it operates on the
ground. I needed to know how doctors went about the task of obtaining the information
necessary in order to complete a Form C.
1.14 Six of Shipman’s former colleagues provided witness statements about their practice in
relation to the completion of Form C. Witness statements were also obtained from 16
general practitioners who had, at various times, signed Forms C at Shipman’s request.
Ten of these doctors gave oral evidence during the Stage Two hearings, when they were
asked detailed questions about the forms they had signed for Shipman’s patients. Those
ten doctors were also asked about the Forms B they had signed for their own patients over
the relevant period.
1.15 Dr Morgan’s oral evidence (to which I have referred above) dealt also with his practice
when completing Forms C, and this provided some context for the evidence of the Hyde
Form C doctors.
35
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
1.16 I shall explain in Chapter Eleven how it became evident to the Inquiry that some crematoria
imposed a requirement that one of questions 5–8 on Form C must be answered in the
affirmative. Once the Inquiry became aware of that, a survey was carried out, with the
assistance of the Cremation Society of Great Britain, in order to discover how many
crematoria in England, Wales and Scotland had such a requirement and how the
requirement had originated. Examples of completed cremation forms were obtained from
each crematorium which was found to have such a requirement. Further witness
statements were obtained from general practitioners practising in the area of the
crematoria concerned, describing their experience of speaking to relatives and other
persons in order to fulfil the requirement imposed by their local crematorium. Eight
provided statements. A further witness statement was obtained from a doctor whose
practice was to speak to relatives and other persons, for the purposes of completing Form
C, but whose local crematorium did not require this to be done.
1.17 Dr John Grenville, a general practitioner who gave expert evidence in Phase One,
provided a report expanding upon the evidence he had given on the issue of ‘old age’.
Crematorium Medical Referees
1.18 Most of Shipman’s victims were cremated at the Dukinfield crematorium. The cremations
were authorised, in the main, by Dr Betty Hinchliffe, who was Deputy Medical Referee,
then Medical Referee, at the crematorium, and by Dr Jane Holme, who was Deputy
Medical Referee to Dr Hinchliffe. I have had to consider whether their conduct in
authorising those cremations warranted criticism. It has also been necessary for me to
assess the value of the role of the medical referee, both as it was intended by Parliament
and as it is fulfilled in practice. Before making judgements of this kind, I had to have a
picture of the way in which the task of the medical referee was approached by
practitioners other than those at Dukinfield.
1.19 The Inquiry team identified three medical referees who were asked to provide evidence.
Each of these had somewhat different experience. Professor M Memon is a medical
practitioner with a special interest in community and public health medicine. He is
involved with postgraduate medical training. Since Shipman’s conviction, he has (with
others) made a number of suggestions as to possible reforms which might be made to the
cremation certification system. Dr Morgan, whom I have already mentioned, is a general
practitioner and medical referee and has experience therefore of all aspects of the
cremation certification process. Dr Gordon Pledger, Medical Referee at the Newcastleupon-Tyne
crematorium (one of those with a requirement that one of questions 5–8 on
Form C is answered in the affirmative), has had a varied medical career. He retired from
his position as Director of Public Health for Newcastle in 1992. He has been advocating
changes to the cremation certification procedures since before Shipman’s criminal
activities came to light.
1.20 Dr Morgan and Dr Pledger gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. Before they did so, they
examined a number of cremation forms relating to Shipman’s patients. The object of this
exercise was not that they should give ‘expert’evidence, but merely that they should tell
the Inquiry how they would have dealt with those forms, had the forms been among a batch
36
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
of cremation documents which they had to deal with at their crematoria. I shall refer in
Chapter Sixteen to the outcome of that exercise. It gave me a helpful insight into the way
in which those medical referees approached their task.
1.21 In addition, the Inquiry obtained evidence from a number of medical referees and
crematorium staff at crematoria where there is a requirement that one of questions 5–8 on
Form C is answered in the affirmative. A witness statement was obtained from one medical
referee whose crematorium has recently ceased to impose such a requirement.
1.22 Most of the cremations of Shipman’s patients were, as I have said, authorised by
Dr Hinchliffe and Dr Jane Holme. Some were authorised by Dr Thomas Holme,
Dr Hinchliffe’s predecessor. He has since died.
1.23 Both Dr Hinchliffe and Dr Jane Holme gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. In addition to
examining cases in which they had been involved where Shipman had completed
the Form B, the Inquiry also looked at a number of deaths falling within two separate
three-month periods, where Dr Hinchcliffe and Dr Holme had authorised cremations
which had no connection with Shipman. This gave me a more comprehensive picture of
their approach to their task and also enabled me to see examples of Forms B and C
completed by a variety of doctors other than Shipman.
1.24 Witness statements were also obtained from a former medical referee and a deputy
medical referee at the Stockport crematorium and a former deputy medical referee at the
Dukinfield crematorium. They had authorised a few cremations of Shipman’s patients and
were asked about some of those specific deaths. They provided witness statements
dealing with their general practice and with those cases in particular.
1.25 The Inquiry also carried out some very small-scale research into the performance of
medical referees at crematoria other than Dukinfield. Crematorium forms, covering two
periods of three months each, were obtained from four crematoria. The forms were
examined and the notes (relating to topics which had been queried by the medical
referee) made on the forms by the medical referee were examined. Thus, I was able to
compare the types of query raised by Dr Hinchliffe and Dr Holme with those raised by
medical referees elsewhere. This exercise also gave me an opportunity to examine Forms
B and C completed by doctors outside Hyde.
The Home Office
1.26 At present, the Home Office has certain responsibilities in relation to cremation
procedures. In particular, it has responsibility for keeping under consideration the need
for changes to cremation legislation. I have had to consider whether, in permitting the
cremation system to remain virtually unchanged for a century, the Home Office had
properly discharged its responsibilities. This issue is of particular importance in the light
of the fact that no fewer than 176 of the people whom Shipman killed are known to have
been cremated. It was therefore necessary for me to have a detailed understanding of the
history underlying the continued existence of the cremation procedures over the last
100 years.
37
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
1.27 Mr Robert Clifford, Head of the Coroners Section of the Animal Procedures and Coroners
Unit, attended the Inquiry to give oral evidence. He had previously provided a witness
statement setting out the history of the Home Office’s attempts to implement the
recommendation of the Committee chaired by Mr Norman (later Judge) Brodrick QC (‘the
Brodrick Committee’), made in 1971, that the cremation procedures should be abolished
in their entirety. Mr Clifford had little personal knowledge of the events in question, since
he only joined the relevant Section in 1995. However, the Inquiry requested, and was
provided with, a very large quantity of Home Office documentation, from which it was
possible to piece together the relevant history.
The Registration Service
1.28 Most of the deaths of Shipman’s patients, including those whom he killed, were registered
at the Tameside register office. I have had to consider whether the registrars who
registered those deaths should have noticed that they were registering an excessive
number of deaths that had been certified by Shipman. In order to be in a position to make
a judgement about that matter, it was necessary for me to have a clear understanding of
the practice and procedures followed when registering a death and of how registrars deal
with various types of circumstances which might arise in the course of their work. This
evidence was also of assistance when I came to consider whether the functions currently
fulfilled by the registrars in the scrutiny of MCCDs are appropriate, or whether there should
be changes to the system.
1.29 In order to identify registrars who might provide the Inquiry with evidence about the
practice and procedures for registering deaths, the Inquiry team contacted Miss Ceinwen
Lloyd, Branch Manager Births and Deaths at the ONS. She provided a number of names,
among them that of Mrs Jane West, registrar for the Boston district and Training Officer for
the Lincolnshire registration service. Mrs West provided a witness statement, together
with documentation produced for the guidance of registrars. She gave oral evidence to
the Inquiry and, as a Training Officer, was in a good position to inform me about practice
in the registration service as it is taught to registrars and deputy registrars in her county.
Mrs Susan Jones, a registrar from Blackpool, and Mr William Jenkins, former Deputy Head
of the Registration Division of the General Register Office (GRO), also provided witness
statements.
1.30 In relation to practice at the Tameside register office, I heard oral evidence from two
current registrars, one former registrar and a former deputy registrar. In addition, witness
statements were provided by the Superintendent Registrar, the Additional Superintendent
Registrar, two current registrars, a deputy registrar and four former registrars. Their
evidence covered a period of just less than 30 years.
The General Register Office
1.31 In relation to two cases where Shipman had killed, the GRO had given advice to registrars
at Tameside that ‘natural causes’was an acceptable cause of death. I have had to
consider whether that advice was correct and, if it was not, how it came to be given. I have
also had to consider whether the system for providing advice and guidance to registrars
38
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
is adequate to enable them properly to fulfil their responsibility for scrutinising MCCDs. To
assist me in that task, I heard oral evidence from Mr David Trembath, Manager of the
General Section of the GRO, and a member of his staff.
1.32 Miss Lloyd provided a detailed witness statement, dealing with registration practice,
together with relevant documentation. She also provided a witness statement about the
steps taken by the GRO to implement the recommendations of the Brodrick Committee
relating to medical certification of the cause of death. Annexed to that witness statement
were documents, setting out the history of events from 1971 until the early 1990s.
Coroners and Their Staff
1.33 Very few of the cases where Shipman had killed were reported to the local coroner, who
was the Coroner for Greater Manchester South District, Mr John Pollard. I have had to
consider why that was, and whether it occurred by reason of any fault on the part of the
Coroner or his staff. I have also had to consider whether the fact that Shipman was able
to avoid a report to the Coroner on so many occasions arose as a result of fundamental
defects within the system itself. Since the coroner system is intended to provide a
mechanism for investigating deaths occurring otherwise than as a result of a natural
disease process, the fact that so many killings were able to go unreported to the Coroner
is clearly a matter of great concern. Examination of the current coroner system was central
to my consideration of the post-death procedures and to my recommendations for the
future.
1.34 In general, coroners are appointed locally. There is no unified coroner service. Any
leadership which is provided is given by the Coroners’Society of England and Wales. The
Inquiry therefore began by approaching the Honorary Secretary of the Society,
Mr Michael Burgess, HM Coroner for Surrey. He gave a witness statement to the Inquiry,
in response to detailed questions put to him by the Inquiry team. Statements were also
provided by the former Secretary of the Society, Dr John Burton. In addition, the Inquiry
obtained evidence from Dr Nigel Chapman, one of the few coroners possessing a medical
qualification, and from Mr Christopher Dorries, HM Coroner for South Yorkshire (West) and
author of a textbook about coronial practice1. Mr Burgess, Mr Dorries and Dr Chapman
gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. All hold full-time positions as coroners. The Inquiry also
obtained a witness statement from Mr John Hughes, part-time Coroner for North Wales
Central & North East Wales. In connection with the procedures which follow when a
sudden death occurs at home, the Inquiry obtained witness statements from Dr Elizabeth
Stearn, HM Coroner for London (Eastern District) and Mr Roger Whittaker, HM Coroner for
West Yorkshire (Western District). A total of ten other coroners provided further information
to the Inquiry dealing with the involvement of police officers in deaths reported to them.
Similar information was obtained from two offices of procurators fiscal in Scotland.
1.35 Mr Pollard gave oral evidence to the Inquiry about the practice within the Greater
Manchester South District office. In order to illustrate those practices, the Inquiry had
obtained Mr Pollard’s files relating to a number of cases unconnected with Shipman. For
example, Mr Pollard was asked to produce all documentation relating to the last 20 deaths
1 Dorries, CP (1999) ‘Coroner’s Courts – a guide to law and practice’. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
39
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
referred to his office by registrars prior to 31st July 2002. That was one of a number of
categories of documentation requested and obtained. Consideration of that
documentation, and of Mr Pollard’s evidence relating to its contents, provided me with a
valuable insight into the decision-making process applied in his office, both before
Shipman’s arrest and conviction and more recently. Mr Pollard’s predecessor, Mr Peter
Revington, gave a witness statement to the Inquiry but was not fit enough to attend to give
oral evidence.
1.36 I heard evidence from five members and former members of Mr Pollard’s office staff. A
further three members or former members of the office staff provided witness statements.
I also heard evidence from one of Mr Pollard’s current coroner’s liaison officers,
Mr Christopher Gaines, who has responsibility for the area which includes Hyde. Oral
evidence was also given by two former coroner’s officers, one of whom currently serves
as Mr Gaines’deputy. A witness statement was provided to the Inquiry by a coroner’s
officer who briefly held that post in the late 1980s.
1.37 Additionally, I heard oral evidence from Mrs Christine Hurst, who has been the senior
coroner’s officer in Cheshire since 1998 and who, in her capacity as the Deputy
Chairperson of the Coroner’s Officers Association, has made a significant contribution
towards the education and training of coroner’s officers. The Chairman of the Association,
Mr John Coopey, also provided a witness statement.
Funeral Directors
1.38 Funeral directors play a most important role in the post-death procedures. They have
close contact with families and provide advice and practical support. They act as
co-ordinators for the cremation certification process and liaise with doctors, registrars and
coroners’offices as necessary. Doctors attend their premises to examine the bodies of
deceased persons for whom they are to complete cremation forms. Funeral directors are
in a unique position to see at first hand the manner in which the examination is carried out
and the attitude of doctors to the completion of the cremation forms.
1.39 With these factors in mind, the Inquiry requested and obtained a witness statement from
Mr Nigel Rose, who is a member of the Executive of the National Association of Funeral
Directors and a director of a large firm of funeral directors. He gave oral evidence about his
experiences of post-death procedures. Statements were also obtained from four funeral
directors from the Hyde area, dealing in particular with procedures for death and
cremation certification and with their knowledge of Shipman.
Pathologists
1.40 An important investigative tool available to the coroner is the autopsy. The Inquiry heard
some evidence in Phase One about autopsies relating to specific deaths of Shipman’s
patients. In Stage Two, it was necessary to explore the adequacy of the ‘routine’coroner’s
autopsy and the extent to which such an autopsy provides the ‘gold standard’answer to
the issue of cause of death which it is commonly assumed to do. In order to inform me
about these matters, the Inquiry team obtained evidence from Professor Helen Whitwell,
40
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Professor of Forensic Pathology and Head of Department at the University of Sheffield,
who had given evidence in Phase One. She gave further evidence at the Stage Two
hearings. Dr Martin Gillett, a consultant histopathologist who performs many coroners’
autopsies, also gave oral evidence.
1.41 One issue that I was anxious to explore was the extent to which non-invasive techniques
of post-mortem examination might provide a viable alternative to the full invasive autopsy.
The Inquiry team therefore obtained a statement from Dr Rob Bisset, a consultant
radiologist from Manchester, who has pioneered the use of magnetic resonance scanning
after death. This has been of particular value to the Jewish community, whose members
are opposed to the invasive autopsy on religious grounds. The Inquiry team also obtained
evidence from the Royal College of Radiologists.
Police
1.42 As I shall explain in Chapter Four, many deaths are reported to the police in their general
‘public service’capacity, and not because it is suspected that there may be some criminal
involvement in the death. Except in those cases where a death is reported to them
because there is a suspicion of criminal involvement, the policy of most police forces in
England and Wales is that their role ceases as soon as it becomes clear that the
deceased’s general practitioner is prepared to certify the cause of death. In cases where
there is no suspicion of criminal involvement but where the general practitioner cannot
certify a cause of death, the police may have some involvement in reporting the
circumstances to the coroner, or in investigating on his/her behalf.
1.43 On the occasions when officers of the Greater Manchester Police (GMP) were called out
to attend the deaths of Shipman’s patients, they generally did so in their ‘public service’
role. Never, before Dr Linda Reynolds came forward in March 1998, was it suggested to
them in connection with a ‘Shipman death’that there was any suspicion of criminal
involvement.
1.44 It was important that I fully understood the nature of the involvement of the police in
attending deaths in their ‘public service’capacity. Ten GMP officers of different ranks
gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. Five of those officers had attended deaths where it is
now known that Shipman had killed. Detective Chief Superintendent Peter Stelfox, from
whom I had heard evidence in Stage One, gave oral evidence about Shipman-related
cases, as well as in connection with the general issues arising from police involvement in
‘non-suspicious’sudden deaths occurring in the community. The Inquiry also obtained
witness statements from a further six officers.
1.45 In addition, evidence was obtained from twelve other police forces in connection with
police attendance at deaths occurring in the community.
Ambulance Services
1.46 Ambulance crews from the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service NHS Trust (GMAS)
attended about 80 of the deaths of patients whom Shipman had killed. The Inquiry heard
oral evidence from nine ambulance personnel who had attended deaths of persons killed
41
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
by Shipman. They explained the procedures followed when attending a death. I also
heard evidence from the daughter of one of the victims. Mr Neil Barnes, who is the General
Manager of Clinical Governance at GMAS, gave useful background evidence and
explained recent discussions between GMAS and the GMP. Witness statements were
obtained from a further seven members of GMAS staff. Evidence was also provided by
ambulance services from 14 other areas.
Deaths Occurring ‘Out of Hours’
1.47 During the process of gathering evidence, the Inquiry legal team became increasingly
aware of the practical problems associated with deaths occurring outside normal general
practitioner working hours. The Inquiry received written material from 16 organisations
with a special interest in ‘out of hours’services, in relation to the problems associated with
‘out of hours’deaths. The Inquiry also obtained evidence on the same issue from the
British Federation of Care Home Proprietors, from the National Care Homes Association
and from four persons in positions of authority in nursing or care homes.
Evidence in the Case of Mrs Renate Overton
1.48 In addition to evidence from the sources identified above, I received evidence from
paramedics, nurses, doctors, consultants, hospital management and administration staff,
coroner’s staff and a retired consultant pathologist relating to the death of Mrs Renate
Overton. I also heard evidence from members of her family. Following investigation of
Mrs Overton’s death in Phase One, I found that Shipman had deliberately given her an
overdose of diamorphine (possibly morphine), intending to kill her. In the event, she
survived, in a persistent vegetative state, for 14 months before her death in April 1995. I
was concerned to investigate precisely how the post-death procedures had operated in
her case. The results of that investigation are set out in Chapter Thirteen of this Report.
1.49 As well as discovering what had happened in Mrs Overton’s case, the evidence given in
relation to her death also informed my general view of the extent to which the existing
post-death procedures provide an effective means of investigating the circumstances of
a death.
Documentary Evidence
1.50 The evidence to which I have referred above, whilst providing me with a good insight into
the operation of the post-death procedures, and enabling me to place in context the
detailed evidence about procedures and practices in Tameside, does not, of course,
represent the whole picture. Viewed in isolation, it would represent only a small part of that
picture. However, the evidence available to me has been a great deal more extensive than
that which has been prepared specifically for the Inquiry.
1.51 In particular, I have been able to examine and consider documentation from the following
sources.
42
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Departmental and Other Committees and Working Parties
1.52 The Committee whose work has been most relevant and significant to this Inquiry is the
Brodrick Committee, which reported in 1971. However, there are a large number of reports
of other committees and working parties dealing with topics which the Inquiry has
considered and these have provided valuable background reading. Many of them are
referred to in the course of this Report.
The Home Office
1.53 As well as the documentation to which I have already referred, and other material relevant
to coroners, the Inquiry has had access to the responses of individuals and organisations
to Consultation Papers issued by the Home Office Review into Death Certification,
conducted in 2000–2001, and by the Fundamental Review of Death Certification and the
Coroner Services in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (‘the Coroners Review’), carried
out between 2001 and 2003. Contained within those responses was a wealth of
information and experience about the working of the post-death procedures. The
responses to the first of these two Reviews, which became available shortly after this
Inquiry started work, provided a particularly valuable insight into the working of the
relevant systems at an early stage of our investigations.
1.54 Other Home Office work, including the recent Review of Forensic Pathology Services in
England and Wales, has also provided valuable background information.
Academic and Professional Journals
1.55 With the assistance of the Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, Dr Aneez Esmail, the Inquiry
team collected, from academic and professional journals, a large amount of published
literature dealing with death and cremation certification and related issues. I have referred
to some of this literature (in particular, to some of the research carried out over the years)
in the course of this Report. Although the research projects conducted in the past have
tended to be small in scale, they neverthless provide some objective means of assessing
whether the overall picture of the operation of the systems that I have gained from the rest
of the evidence is likely to be correct. In that way, they have provided a valuable check on
my preliminary views.
Other Sources
1.56 The Inquiry has also obtained a number of publications and other documentation from
such sources as the Office for National Statistics, the British Medical Association, the
Cremation Society of Great Britain, the General Medical Council, the Royal College of
General Practitioners, the Royal College of Pathologists, the National Confidential Enquiry
into Perioperative Deaths, the Department of Health and many other organisations.
Material has been obtained about death investigation and certification systems in a
number of other jurisdictions, both in the British Isles and further afield.
43
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
The Inquiry’s Own Consultations
1.57 Before the start of the Stage Two hearings, the Inquiry published a Discussion Paper,
‘Developing a New System for Death Certification‘, which presented a ‘working model’for
a revised death investigation and certification system. The purpose of the Discussion
Paper was to provide a focus, both for written responses and for discussion at a series of
seminars held by the Inquiry in January 2003. The Inquiry received written responses from
154 individuals and organisations. The views expressed in those responses were
considered and discussed at the seminars.
1.58 The seminars covered six different topics and extended over nine days. Participating in
the seminars were representatives of a large number of the organisations involved in the
day-to-day operation of the post-death procedures, together with a number of individuals
with particular knowledge of those procedures. One seminar, lasting two days, was
devoted to the systems of death investigation and certification in five other jurisdictions –
those of Victoria (Australia), Ontario (Canada), Maryland (USA), Finland and Scotland. I
shall discuss some of the views expressed during the Inquiry’s consultation process in
Chapter Seventeen of this Report. An account of the systems in operation in the five other
jurisdictions to which I have referred is set out in Chapter Eighteen.
The Inquiry’s Feasibility Study
1.59 Contained within the Discussion Paper were four sample forms, intended by the Inquiry
for completion by the person verifying the fact that a person had died, by the doctor
certifying the cause of death or reporting the death to the coroner, by a member of the
deceased’s family and by the funeral director responsible for the arrangements for burial
or cremation. The purpose of producing the forms was to illustrate the nature and extent
of the information which the Inquiry envisaged might be collected and recorded at various
stages of the death certification process. The Inquiry sought views about the contents of
the forms and who should complete them. One of the Inquiry’s seminars was entirely
devoted to discussion of the forms and any problems which might arise in completing
them.
1.60 In a further attempt to identify potential problems with the forms and to ascertain how they
might work in practice, the Inquiry commissioned a small feasibility study, to be carried
out by the Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care at the University of
Leicester. Thirty nine doctors and six relatives were asked to complete forms in relation to
deaths which had occurred recently. They were then interviewed, their views on the forms
canvassed and any problems with specific questions on the forms identified. The study
team reported in March 2003.
1.61 As a result of points made by respondents to the Discussion Paper and by participants at
the seminars, the Inquiry had already concluded that the number of forms to be completed
after a death should be reduced and the forms themselves greatly simplified. The results
of the feasibility study provided support for that view and also provided valuable pointers
which were used when the Inquiry team undertook the task of redesigning the forms for
inclusion in this Report.
44
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Costings
1.62 The Inquiry team considered whether attempts should be made to obtain evidence
comparing the cost of any revised system that I might recommend with that of the present
systems. A decision was taken not to do so. This was not because the Inquiry does not
regard cost as an important and relevant issue; plainly, it is. However, the Inquiry did not
have the necessary expertise to conduct the exercise itself. No steps could be taken to
commission an external study until I had resolved what my recommendations would be. I
could not do that until the evidence and consultation processes were complete. Since it
was the Inquiry’s firm intention to deliver this Report to Ministers in the early summer of
2003, there was obviously insufficient time for any detailed costings, based on my
recommendations, to be prepared by any outside agency.
1.63 In any event, I doubted that any estimate of costings was likely to be of significant
assistance at this stage. After all, assuming that my recommendations were to be adopted
in their entirety, many details, together with the timing of the changes, remain to be
decided. In consequence, any attempt at an estimate would necessarily be very
speculative. In the light of all these considerations, it was decided that it would be
inappropriate and impractical for the Inquiry to expend substantial resources on an
attempt to obtain evidence about the potential cost consequent upon any
recommendations I might make.
The Effect of the Evidence
1.64 All the material obtained from the sources which I have described above has, of course,
been set against the background of the evidence, both lay and expert, received by the
Inquiry during Phase One, when I considered and reported upon the circumstances and
aftermath of just under 500 deaths of Shipman’s patients.
1.65 In her Opening Statement at the start of the Stage Two hearings, Leading Counsel to the
Inquiry said that, when I had before me all the material which the Inquiry had gathered and
had heard the discussions at the seminars, I should be in the best possible position, not
only to make findings in respect of the operation of the post-death systems in Tameside,
but also to make wide-ranging recommendations for changes to those systems. I am
confident that this is so.
Before the Oral Hearings
The Arrangements for the Distribution of Evidence
1.66 The arrangements for the distribution of evidence were the same for Stage Two as for
Phase One. They are described at paragraphs 3.17 and 3.18 of my First Report. As in
Phase One, all the evidence available to the Inquiry was released into the public domain
by means of the Inquiry website.
The Public Meeting
1.67 On 21st March 2002, the Inquiry held a Public Meeting, at which I explained the
arrangements for Stages One and Two of Phase Two.
45
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Representation
1.68 Before and after the Meeting, I granted leave to various individuals and organisations to
be represented before the Inquiry during the Stage Two hearings and, for some,
recommended funding for that representation at public expense. A list of participants in
Stage Two and their representatives can be seen at Appendix A of this Report.
Salmon Letters
1.69 Before the Stage Two hearings began, the Solicitor to the Inquiry, Mr Henry Palin, sent
letters (known as ‘Salmon letters’) to those persons and organisations whose conduct
might be the subject of criticism by the Inquiry. The potential criticisms were clearly
identified in those letters.
1.70 In the event that any further potential criticisms came to light at or after the hearings, these
were the subject of further Salmon letters. Recipients of Salmon letters were given the
opportunity to respond to the potential criticisms in writing, as well as in the course of their
oral evidence at the hearings.
Broadcasting
1.71 I had given permission for the Stage One hearings to be broadcast in accordance with a
protocol which had been prepared by the Inquiry and was designed to ensure that Inquiry
material would not be misused. Those arrangements caused no difficulties in Stage One
and I received no representations suggesting that they should be discontinued. I therefore
gave permission to recognised organisations to broadcast during Stage Two, provided
that they complied with a slightly amended protocol, clarifying the broadcasters’duties
in respect of websites. During Stage Two, I received and granted two applications from
witnesses that their evidence should not be broadcast.
The Oral Hearings
1.72 The oral hearings were held in the Council Chamber at Manchester Town Hall. The Stage
Two hearings took place from 7th October to 19th December 2002 and on 29th January
2003.
1.73 The arrangements for the oral hearings, and for the publication of evidence, were the
same as for the Phase One hearings. They are described at paragraphs 3.28 to 3.36 of
my First Report. The only significant difference was that the public viewing facility at the
Hyde Library had been closed before the hearings began. The local authority had
required the premises for other purposes and the number of people using the facility had
fallen. After consultation, in the course of which few objections to closure were raised, I
decided that the public expense of setting up another facility could not be justified. The
public gallery at the Town Hall remained open, of course, and transcripts and other
documents were posted on the Inquiry’s website after each day’s hearings.
1.74 Volunteers from Tameside Victim Support attended to assist family witnesses at the start
of the Stage Two hearings, but were not required during the remainder of these hearings.
46
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
I remain most grateful to Tameside Victim Support for all the assistance they have given
during the course of the Inquiry.
1.75 In general, witnesses who gave oral evidence during the Stage Two hearings were called
by Counsel to the Inquiry. However, in the interests of fairness, those witnesses who had
received Salmon letters were given the opportunity of making an opening statement of
their evidence in response to questions by their own counsel or solicitor, before being
questioned by Counsel to the Inquiry. Some, but not all, recipients of Salmon letters
availed themselves of this opportunity. Others chose to follow the usual procedure.
Submissions
1.76 At the conclusion of the Stage Two hearings, Counsel to the Inquiry produced written
submissions relating to those areas of the evidence in respect of which criticisms had
been levelled at individuals or organisations. Representatives of most of those individuals
and organisations also made written submissions, as did the Tameside Families Support
Group. I offered an opportunity to all those representatives to make representations that
I should hear oral submissions, but received no such representations. The only topic on
which I heard oral submissions was in respect of the death of Mrs Overton.
The Seminars
1.77 The seminars were held in the Council Chamber at Manchester Town Hall from 13th to
24th January 2003. Forty participants, some representing organisations with a particular
interest or involvement in post-death procedures, took part in the discussions at the
seminars. Those discussions were led by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry. Although
structured, the discussions were significantly less formal than the oral evidence given
during the usual Inquiry hearings.
1.78 Participants in the seminars had submitted written responses to the Inquiry’s Discussion
Paper in advance and expanded on those responses during the course of the seminars.
Persons attending the seminars as observers were able to raise points through Counsel
for the consideration of seminar participants. After the seminars, the Inquiry received a
number of further responses, both from participants who wished to confirm or revise views
previously expressed, and from people who had attended the seminars, or who had
become aware of the discussions that had taken place, and wanted to contribute their own
opinions.
1.79 I found the seminars, and indeed the whole consultation process undertaken by the
Inquiry, extremely valuable in clarifying my thoughts and assisting me to formulate my
recommendations for the future.
The Structure of This Report
1.80 In Chapters Two and Three of this Report, I shall seek to set out the history giving rise to the
current procedures for death certification, death registration and cremation certification,
47
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
together with the existing coronial system. By doing that, I shall try to set in context the
detailed discussion of those systems that follows.
1.81 Deaths occurring in the community, especially those which happen out of the usual office
and surgery hours, present special difficulties. In Chapter Four, I shall discuss the roles
of the police, the ambulance services, general practitioners and deputising doctors in the
immediate aftermath of a death in the community, in particular when the death occurs ‘out
of hours’.
1.82 In Chapters Five and Six, I shall describe the current systems for medical certification of
the cause of death and registration of death, and shall set out my analyses of the strengths
and weaknesses of those systems and my conclusions about them.
1.83 Chapters Seven, Eight and Nine will deal with the coroner system. In Chapter Seven, I shall
discuss the jurisdiction of the coroner and way in which decisions are made as to whether
deaths reported to the coroner fall within that jurisdiction. In Chapter Eight, I shall consider
the role of the coroner’s officer and the respects in which that role might be developed in
the future. In Chapter Nine, I shall describe the way in which coroners undertake their
investigations into the deaths that are reported to them. Chapters Seven and Nine also
contain discussion about the procedures in operation at the office of the Coroner for
Greater Manchester South District, whose geographical jurisdiction includes Hyde.
Pathology is an important adjunct to the coroner’s investigation and its role is discussed
in Chapter Ten.
1.84 In Chapter Eleven, I shall describe the system of cremation certification as it operates on
the ground and the respective roles of the Form B and Form C doctors and the medical
referee. I shall also consider whether the Home Office is to be criticised for its failure to
effect changes in the procedures for cremation certification.
1.85 Chapter Twelve will be devoted to a discussion of the position of bereaved relatives of a
deceased person and the part that they can play in the investigation and certification of a
death. I shall consider their needs and, in particular, the needs of relatives from minority
groups, whose religion or culture make it particularly important that burial or cremation
should take place as quickly as possible after death and who have particular objections
to invasive post-mortem examinations.
1.86 In Chapter Thirteen, I shall deal with issues relating to the death of Mrs Renate Overton. In
Chapters Fourteen, Fifteen and Sixteen, I shall set out the evidence about the procedures
operated by the registrars at the Tameside register office, the doctors who signed
cremation Forms C for Shipman and the medical referees at the Dukinfield crematorium.
I shall consider whether those individuals should be criticised for the way in which they
dealt with the deaths of Shipman’s patients. In Chapter Fourteen, I shall also consider the
quality of the advice given to registrars at Tameside by staff at the GRO in connection with
two cases where Shipman had killed and attributed the cause of death to ‘natural causes’.
1.87 Chapters Seventeen and Eighteen will give an account of the Inquiry’s consultation
processes and their outcome. Chapter Nineteen sets out my proposals for change.
1.88 It will be apparent from the contents of this Chapter that the Inquiry has received a wealth
of evidence in connection with the issues considered during Stage Two. In this Report, I
48
SHIP03$$13 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
have not sought to set out that evidence in detail. The evidence is there to be read by all
who wish to do so. Instead, I have recorded my observations and conclusions about the
various systems, based upon all the evidence I have heard and read. I have sought to
devise systems of death investigation and certification that will not only protect patients
from a future Shipman but will also meet all the needs and expectations of the public, both
collectively and individually.
49
SHIP03P001 25-06-03 15:08:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER TWO
Registration of Death, Medical Certification of the Cause of
Death and the Coronial System:a Brief History
Introduction
2.1 The systems for registration of death and medical certification of the cause of death
evolved in parallel. Both were the products of a growing awareness of the importance of
collecting accurate statistics, including mortality statistics. It was quickly realised that
information about causes of death could be used for the advancement of medical
knowledge and the improvement of public health. It was also recognised that death
certification could provide a safeguard against concealed homicide. In this Chapter, I
shall trace briefly the origins of these systems, which have remained virtually unchanged
over the last 75 years.
2.2 The coronial system has been in existence for hundreds of years, although the functions of
the coroner are significantly more circumscribed now than they were in the twelfth century.
Those functions are inextricably linked with the systems of registration and medical
certification of the cause of death. Apart from where a death occurs in custody (when there
are special requirements to report the death), the registrar is the only class of person with
a statutory duty to report a death to the coroner. The coroner is the only class of person,
apart from a registered medical practitioner, who can furnish the registrar with the
documentation necessary for the registration of a death. If there is no doctor who can
certify the cause of a death, the coronial system is the only route by which that death can
be registered and by which burial or cremation of the deceased’s body can lawfully
take place.
2.3 Despite the interdependence of the coronial system and the systems for registration and
certification of the cause of death, they have developed entirely separately. Different
statutes govern them and different Government Departments are responsible for issues
arising from them. Later in this Report, I shall consider the effects of this fragmentation of
the various systems and I shall consider how the various systems presently in existence
might be translated into one cohesive whole.
2.4 During the course of this Chapter, I shall refer to the holding of ‘post-mortem
examinations’, meaning invasive examinations of the organs of the body, carried out after
death. ‘Post-mortem examination’ is the term used in the relevant legislation. Many
pathologists use the word ‘autopsy’ to describe the same procedure. In the course of this
Report, I shall use both terms interchangeably.
Registration of Death and Medical Certification of the Cause of Death
The First Requirement to Register a Death
2.5 On 1st July 1837, the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1836 came into force. The aim of
the Act was to ‘provide the Means for a complete Register of the Births, Deaths and
51
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Marriages of His Majesty’s Subjects in England’. A General Register Office was set up,
headed by a Registrar General. The Act allowed the medical cause of death to be
provided and recorded when a death was registered. However, there was no requirement
that this should be done. Following registration of a death, the registrar was required to
deliver to the person having charge of the funeral a certificate stating that the death had
been duly registered. If an inquest was held, the coroner could issue an order for burial
before registration.
2.6 Burial of the body could take place before the death was registered. No penalties were
prescribed for failure to register, provided that the fact that the burial had been carried out
without a certificate from the registrar or a burial order from the coroner was notified to the
registrar. Consequently, even after 1837, not all deaths were registered. For those deaths
that were registered, a medical cause of death was not always provided. When it was, it
tended to be unreliable. There was no requirement that the cause should be certified by
a medical practitioner. Nor was there any consistency in the descriptions of cause of death
used by different practitioners. Despite these shortcomings, the 1836 Act laid the
foundation for the present system of collecting mortality statistics.
2.7 Over the ensuing years, various steps were taken to improve the reliability of the
particulars of cause of death recorded on registration. Medical practitioners who had
treated a deceased person during his/her last illness were encouraged to provide the
family with a written statement of the cause of death for production to the registrar.
Registrars were instructed to obtain details of the cause of death direct from medical
practitioners, rather than from the person giving information about the death. Efforts were
made to achieve some consistency of terminology among members of the medical
profession. During the 1840s, the Registrar General distributed the first books of forms for
use when certifying the cause of death. These forms became known as Medical
Certificates of Cause of Death (MCCD). Despite their introduction over a decade before,
more than 11% of deaths registered in England and Wales in the year 1860 were
registered without an MCCD.
The Duty to Provide a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death
2.8 The Births and Deaths Registration Act 1874 introduced penalties for failing to register a
death, as a consequence of which the number of unregistered deaths fell. However, there
was still no requirement to register the death before disposal of the body. The Act required
the registrar (after registration of the death or notification that the death had occurred and
a certificate of cause of death had been completed) to issue a certificate stating that the
death had been registered or notified to the registrar. Coroners were also given power to
issue certificates authorising burial when an inquest was held. However, the person
conducting the burial was not required to be in possession of a certificate from a registrar
or coroner before proceeding. The only requirement was that, if no such certificate was
delivered, notice of that fact had to be given to the registrar within seven days of the burial.
2.9 The 1874 Act imposed a duty on any practitioner registered with the General Medical
Council (GMC) who had been in attendance during a person’s last illness to deliver to the
informant (i.e. the person giving information about the death to the registrar) a certificate
52
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
stating the cause of death to the best of his knowledge or belief. No certificate was
required if it was known that an inquest was to be held. Penalties were imposed for failure
to provide a certificate (except on reasonable grounds) and for giving a false certificate.
2.10 Since many medical practitioners did not meet the standards required for registration with
the GMC, the 1874 Act, which imposed the requirement to certify the cause of death only
on registered practitioners, did not have the effect of securing certification of the cause of
every death. In many cases, registrars still had to rely on information supplied by the family
of the deceased person, or by an unregistered medical practitioner.
2.11 Under Regulations issued by the Registrar General, registrars were directed to report to
the coroner any deaths which appeared to be due to violence or were attended by
suspicious circumstances; such deaths were not to be registered until the registrar had
received notification of the coroner’s decision that no inquest was necessary or had been
informed of the finding of the jury at inquest. In 1885, the circumstances in which registrars
were required to report deaths to the coroner were extended by the Registrar General to
include deaths where the cause was unknown and sudden deaths.
The 1893 Select Committee
2.12 In 1893, a Select Committee of Parliament was appointed:
‘... to inquire into the sufficiency of the existing Law as to the Disposal
of the Dead, for securing an accurate Record of the Causes of Death in
all cases, and especially for detecting them where Death may have been
due to Poison, Violence or Criminal Neglect’.
2.13 The Committee reported that the ‘loose’ system of certification of death did not guarantee
a record of the true cause of death; nor did it necessarily prevent the concealment of
homicide. There was no requirement for the attending medical practitioner to see the body
after death or to certify the fact of death. Deaths were frequently certified by medical
practitioners who had not seen the patient for months. Sometimes, the certifying doctor
had never attended the deceased. Certificates could be bought from practitioners and
used for the purposes of fraud, or to conceal suicide or homicide. Registration of death
was known to have taken place in cases where the deceased had been murdered, or was
still alive, or in circumstances where it was not known whether or not s/he had died.
2.14 The situation was said to be even worse in the case of uncertified deaths, i.e. those deaths
for which the cause of death had not been certified by a registered practitioner. In 1891,
uncertified deaths accounted for 2.7% of the deaths registered in England and Wales.
However, the proportion varied markedly from district to district. The Committee noted the
striking trend whereby the deaths of adults of working age (and therefore self-supporting)
were rarely uncertified, whereas the deaths of infants and elderly people, whose age
rendered them ‘as a class, a burden on their friends’, were far more likely to go
uncertified. It was suggested that, for those who were not economically useful, medical
treatment, from a registered practitioner at least, was less likely to be forthcoming than for
those who were in work. The Committee expressed the conviction that ‘vastly more’
deaths occurred from ‘foul play and criminal neglect’ than the law recognised.
53
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
2.15 Where no registered medical practitioner had been in attendance upon the deceased
before death and there was no medical certificate of cause of death, the registrar was
constrained (unless the case was reportable to the coroner and the coroner proceeded
to inquest) to take information on the cause of death from the informant. Such information
was likely to be incorrect; it might even be deliberately misleading. This system was said
by the Committee to be ‘dangerously defective’ and to play into the hands of the
‘criminal classes’. The Committee reported that:
‘... it seems impossible to come to any other conclusion than that an
amendment of the present law is urgently required, and that if no
legislation can be framed which would altogether put an end to foul play
and criminal neglect as secret factors in our national death-roll, much
may be done in the way of reducing the evil by the enactment of judicious
checks’.
The Recommendations of the 1893 Select Committee
2.16 The Report of the Committee makes interesting reading. Many of the issues discussed
within it have been considered by this Inquiry, over a century later. For example, the
Committee expressed concern about the competence of registrars, who have no medical
expertise, to understand the medical terms used to describe causes of death and to
determine whether or not a death should be referred to the coroner. The Report also
criticised the ‘very elastic fashion’ in which the phrase ‘in attendance at the last illness’
had been interpreted in the past. It recommended that a single definition be adopted,
namely ‘personal attendance by the person certifying upon at least two occasions,
one of which should be within eight days of death’. I could give further examples but,
instead, I shall confine myself to summarising the main recommendations of the Report.
2.17 The Committee was determined that uncertified deaths should, as a class, cease to exist
and that, henceforth, ‘... as far as may be, it should be made impossible for any person
to disappear from his place in the community without any satisfactory evidence
being obtained of the cause of his disappearance’. It recommended therefore that no
death should be registered without production of a certificate of the cause of death, in a
prescribed form, signed by a registered medical practitioner or a coroner after an inquest.
The Committee also recommended that the practice of permitting disposal to take place
before registration or authorisation by the coroner should be stopped.
2.18 In order to deal with those cases where no attending doctor was available, the Committee
recommended that registered medical practitioners should be appointed as public
medical certifiers of the cause of death in such cases. When informed of a death, the
certifier should be required to attend and examine the body and make such enquiries and
examination (including post-mortem examination) as he may think necessary to enable
him to form an opinion as to the cause of death. If satisfied that the death was due to natural
causes, he should forward a certificate to the registrar. If the certifier was of the opinion
that the death was due to accident, violence, poison or neglect, or that the circumstances
were in any respect indicative of foul play, he should be required to report the case to the
coroner.
54
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
2.19 The Committee was concerned about the lack of any requirement for the certifying doctor
to view the body of the deceased before providing a certificate. This gave rise to a risk
of fraud or concealment of crime and also, the Committee recognised, to the risk that the
‘deceased’ might in fact still be alive. It was therefore recommended that, before giving a
certificate of cause of death, the medical practitioner in attendance should be required
personally to inspect the body; if he were unable to do so, the fact of death should be
certified by two neighbours of the deceased and their certificate should be attached to the
certificate of cause of death forwarded to the registrar.
After the 1893 Select Committee
2.20 No immediate step was taken to implement these important recommendations. In 1902,
the Departmental Committee charged with preparing draft Regulations to be made under
the Cremation Act 1902 observed that:
‘... burial may take place either without any certificate of the cause of
death or on the certificate of one medical man which may be in the
vaguest and most uncertain terms. Unless, therefore, some definite
ground of suspicion arises, there is no investigation of those cases
where the cause of death is obscure, and where the ambiguity of the
symptoms can be slurred over in a certificate which it is no one’s
business to question or criticise.’
2.21 The Births and Deaths Registration Act 1926 prohibited the disposal of a body except
following receipt of a certificate of the registrar or an order of the coroner. The person
arranging the disposal was required to deliver notification to the registrar of the date, place
and means of disposal. The form of the certificate of cause of death was prescribed; the
Act required the certificate to be delivered by the medical practitioner to the registrar. To
a large extent, these provisions implemented recommendations made in the 1893 Report.
However, in two important respects, the intentions of the 1893 Committee were not
adopted.
2.22 First, the 1893 Committee had intended that the qualification of the medical practitioner
who was to issue the MCCD should continue to be defined by reference to attendance on
the deceased during the last illness. The Committee had recommended that the phrase
should be precisely defined: see paragraph 2.16. Following the passage of the 1926 Act,
the duty to complete an MCCD continued to be imposed on the medical practitioner who
had been in attendance during the deceased’s last illness. However, the phrase was not
defined in the Act. Second, the Committee had also recommended a requirement that
either the certifying practitioner should inspect the body after death or the fact of death
should be certified by two ‘neighbours’ of the deceased. However, the 1926 Act imposed
no such requirement.
2.23 The 1926 Act must be read in conjunction with the Registration (Births, Stillbirths, Deaths
and Marriages) Consolidated Regulations 1927. They provided that a registrar would be
under a duty to report a death if, on the face of the MCCD, it appeared that the certifying
practitioner had not either seen the deceased within 14 days before death or seen the
body after death. I shall refer to this rule as the ‘either/or rule’. It appears that, even if the
55
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
certifying doctor were unable to comply with either of these requirements, this would not
affect the doctor’s qualification to certify the cause of death. That qualification depended
solely on the doctor’s undefined ‘attendance during the last illness’.
2.24 It appears that the ‘either/or rule’ came about as the result of a legislative compromise. The
passing of the 1926 Act followed several attempts to amend the law relating to the
registration of deaths. Private Member’s Bills were presented in 1923, 1924 and 1925. All
failed. The Bill of 1925 contained a clause, which, if enacted, would have provided that,
before a registrar could issue a disposal certificate, a certificate of the fact of death must
have been supplied by a medical practitioner, who had examined the body and had
satisfied himself that life was extinct. This was thought desirable by many as, at that time,
the deceased’s body was examined by a doctor after death in only about 40% of cases
and there was concern in the country that people had been buried while still alive.
However, the clause was opposed by the medical profession and was defeated in the
House of Commons. When a further Private Member’s Bill was presented in 1926, the
clause was replaced by a proposal that a local authority could direct a medical
practitioner to inspect the body to ensure that life was extinct. The clause containing that
proposal was deleted during the committee stage. At the report stage, an attempt was
made to re-introduce the clause from the 1925 Bill, requiring the provision of a certificate
of the fact of death by the medical practitioner who was to certify the cause of death.
However, this amendment was again opposed on the ground that it would impose an
unreasonable burden upon doctors.
2.25 A compromise solution was proposed by the Government. There was to be no specific
requirement that the certifying doctor should see the body after death. The MCCD was to
be redrafted to require the doctor to state whether he had seen the deceased after death
and how long before death he had last seen him/her alive. The registrar would then be
required to refer to the coroner any death in which the doctor had not seen the body after
death or had not seen the deceased within a ‘reasonably short period before death’. It
was suggested that this provision would have two desirable effects. It would increase the
number of cases in which a doctor saw the body after death and it would ensure that
‘a large class of the more doubtful cases’ was reviewed by the coroner. On the basis
of the proposed compromise solution, the amendment was withdrawn and, in due course,
the Bill went through. At that time, the ‘reasonably short period’ within which the doctor
was required to have seen the deceased had not been defined. In 1927, it was decided
that the period should be 14 days. The Regulations of 1927 were brought into force and
the ‘either/or rule’ was established.
2.26 I do not think that the Members of Parliament who considered the effect of the compromise
accepted in 1926 can have realised how the ‘either/or rule’ would work out in practice. It
may be that requiring the doctor to state on the MCCD whether or not he had seen the body
after death had the desired effect of increasing the proportion of cases in which that
happened. However, the effect of the rule was that, provided the doctor had seen the body
after death, it mattered not how long before death the doctor had last seen the patient
alive. The provision, as passed, completely failed to ensure that ‘doubtful cases’, such as
cases in which the doctor had not seen the patient for months before death, would be
reported to the coroner. If the doctor took the trouble to see the body after death, it would
56
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
not matter when he had last seen the patient alive. He might be in no good position to
certify the cause of death, although he could be quite certain that life was extinct. There
was still no definition of ‘attendance during the last illness’. The sensible intentions of
the 1893 Committee were thus frustrated. I shall return to the effect of the ‘either/or rule’
later in this Report.1
2.27 The 1926 Act also imposed controls on the removal of bodies into and out of England and
Wales. Meanwhile, by the Coroners (Amendment) Act of the same year, coroners were
given the power to direct a post-mortem examination if there was reason to believe that
such an examination might render an inquest unnecessary.
2.28 The effect of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1926 was to bring about a situation
whereby registration of a death became virtually impossible without either an acceptable
medical certificate of cause of death, completed by a registered medical practitioner, or
a coroner’s certificate issued after inquest or post-mortem examination. Disposal of a
body could take place only on the authority of a registrar or coroner.
2.29 Despite these measures, I was told that there still remain a very small number of
‘uncertified’ deaths, even today. These usually occur when there is no doctor qualified to
issue a medical certificate of cause of death (perhaps because the patient’s usual general
practitioner is on holiday or ill) and the coroner declines to order an autopsy or hold an
inquest. I shall refer to these deaths again in Chapter Seven.
2.30 Registration is now governed by the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953. In 1965, the
Brodrick Committee was set up to examine the systems of death certification and
coroners. It reported in 1971. The Report recommended a ‘tightening up’ of the
procedures for medical certification of the cause of death. A new form of MCCD was
proposed. For reasons that I shall explain in Chapter Three, its recommendations were
never implemented. As a consequence, the systems for registration of death and medical
certification of the cause of death remain much the same now as they were in 1927.
The Origins of the Coronial System
The Role of the Coroner in Early Times
2.31 The first real evidence of the existence of the office of coroner dates from the twelfth
century. At that time, the Latin title for the office was ‘custos placitorum coronas’ which,
with time, was translated to ‘crowner’ and, thence, ‘coroner’. Holders of the office were
elected by the counties and, later, by the boroughs in which they resided.
2.32 The coroner had both financial and judicial responsibilities. From the earliest times, one
of the coroner’s most important duties was to enquire into unnatural, violent and sudden
deaths. He was also required to keep a record of revenue due to the King in connection
with the administration of justice; a violent or unnatural death might be a source of such
revenue. For example, if it could not be proved that the victim of a violent death was
English, it would be presumed that the deceased was Norman and a fine (the ‘murdrum’)
1 The Inquiry is grateful to Mr Thomas Hennell for his research into the origin of the ‘either/or rule’.
57
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
was payable to the Crown by the local inhabitants. In the case of homicide or suicide, the
weapon which caused the death was forfeit to the Crown as a ‘deodand’, as was any
animal or object which caused a death by misadventure. The chattels of those committing
homicide or suicide were also liable to forfeiture.
2.33 When a sudden death occurred, the coroner was required to attend the scene of death
and view the body. Jurors, consisting of representatives from the local townships, were
summoned to view the body with the coroner and to participate in the inquest. Although
inquests were a common feature of life in thirteenth century England, it seems likely that
many sudden deaths were concealed in order to avoid the various financial penalties
consequent thereon.
2.34 During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, a series of changes to the legal system (in
particular, the increasing role of the justice of the peace) resulted in a decline in the extent
and importance of the coroner’s functions. By the beginning of the sixteenth century,
almost the only significant function left to the coroner was the investigation of unnatural
deaths. The ensuing centuries saw dissent between coroners and justices of the peace
about the ambit of the coronial jurisdiction. The justices contended that the coroners’
jurisdiction was confined to the investigation of obviously violent deaths only. The
coroners, who were paid by reference to the number of inquests held, asserted their right
to investigate all sudden and unexplained deaths.
The Development of the Current Coronial System
2.35 The implementation of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1836 had the effect of giving
coroners a role in the drive to collect and record accurate statistical information about
deaths by means of the new system of registration. Under the Act, coroners were required
to notify the registrar of bodies ‘found exposed’ which were reported to them. After an
inquest had been held, the coroner was to give notice to the registrar of the particulars to
be registered. Burial of a body was permitted upon receipt of a registrar’s certificate or a
coroner’s burial order, issued after an inquest had been opened. However, burial without
receipt of either such certificate was lawful, provided that notification was given to the
registrar of the fact within seven days of the burial being carried out. Penalties were
imposed upon persons who carried out burials of deceased persons without a certificate
from the registrar or the coroner and who did not notify the registrar of the burial.
2.36 Also in 1836, an Act was passed, giving coroners power to compel the attendance of a
medical witness at an inquest and to order the witness to perform an autopsy, if the cause
of death remained uncertain. The effect of this measure was to increase the potential for
the detection of cases of homicide. Over the years that followed, the number of inquests
increased. The Coroners Act 1887 consolidated the laws relating to coroners and placed
the emphasis upon their role in investigating the cause of, and the circumstances
surrounding, deaths which were suspected of being violent or unnatural or which had
occurred in prison or in such place or under such circumstances as to require an inquest.
Coroners did, however, retain the duty to enquire into treasure trove, a vestige of their
former role in protecting the financial interests of the Crown. In the following year, the Local
Government Act 1888 abolished the practice of electing coroners, who were henceforth
to be appointed by the local authority.
58
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
2.37 By 1901, coroners were being notified of about 60,000 deaths per annum, i.e. just over
10% of all deaths in England and Wales at that time. Inquests were held in just over
two-thirds of those cases. Since the coroner had no power to order an autopsy without
an inquest, almost one-third of deaths referred to the coroner were registered without
further medical investigation. In a sizeable proportion of those (about 7500 in the year
1900), no MCCD had been completed, so that the death was eventually registered as
‘uncertified’.
2.38 The Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 introduced important reforms, some of which had
been recommended by a Select Committee which had reported 16 years previously. The
coroner was given the power to order an autopsy without having to proceed to an inquest
in cases where there was no suspicion that the death had arisen as a result of anything
other than natural causes. Also, in an attempt to introduce a higher standard of
competence among coroners, a new requirement provided that future holders of the office
should have medical or legal qualifications and not less than five years’ standing in their
profession. The number of circumstances in which a jury had to be summoned was
reduced and the Lord Chancellor was given power to make rules of practice relating to
procedure in coroners’ courts and in relation to the conduct of autopsies.
2.39 As a result of the implementation of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1926, and the
consequent tightening up of the registration procedures, the number of deaths reported
to coroners rose over the ensuing years. In 1926, there were just over 54,000 reported
deaths; the number had risen to nearly 70,000 ten years later. Of those 70,000 deaths, less
than half (almost 31,000) were followed by inquest. Over 12,000 autopsies were ordered
by coroners in non-inquest cases.
2.40 In 1936, the Report of a Departmental Committee (‘the Wright Committee’), chaired by The
Rt Hon Lord Wright, was published. The Committee had been appointed following
criticism of the conduct of some recent inquests. At the time of its deliberations, there were
309 coroners holding 354 coronerships; 13 coroners were engaged full-time and the rest
part-time. The part-time coroners had little experience in the performance of their coronial
duties and little prospect of gaining such experience. The Committee recommended a
reduction in the number of coroners by means of the merger of smaller jurisdictions. It also
recommended that those appointed to the post of coroner should be legally (not
medically) qualified, preferably with experience as a deputy coroner and having
undertaken a course in forensic medicine. They also recommended that deputy coroners
be appointed by local authorities, not by the coroners themselves. The Committee
proposed changes (including a restriction on press reports) to the conduct of inquests in
the case of suicides. It was also recommended that coroners should have discretion to
dispense with an inquest in certain cases (e.g. ‘simple accidents’, deaths under an
anaesthetic or during an operation). Few of the recommendations of the Wright Committee
were ever enacted.
2.41 The Brodrick Committee was set up in 1965 and gave detailed consideration to the
arrangements existing in the coroner service. The Committee reported in 1971. The
Committee recommended retention of the existing system whereby coroners were the
recipients of reports of deaths that required investigation. The Committee envisaged the
59
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
coroner becoming ‘a principal agent in the certification of medical causes of death’.
Members of the Committee agreed with the Wright Committee that a service comprising
full-time coroners only should, in time, replace the existing system whereby many
coroners were employed part-time. The Committee recommended measures to compel
the new county and metropolitan local authorities to submit for approval by the Home
Secretary proposals for the organisation of a coroner service in their area. Any proposals
for creation of part-time coroners’ districts would have to be justified carefully and might
be rejected. The Committee also suggested that measures should be taken to create
panels of coroners who would be available for special inquiries as and when necessary.
Panel members would also be available to give temporary assistance to coroners in other
areas if required.
2.42 The Committee was anxious to bring to an end the system of local appointment of
coroners. The Report therefore recommended that all coroners, deputies and assistant
deputies should be appointed by the Lord Chancellor’s Department, after consultation
with the relevant local authority. The Lord Chancellor should also have power to remove
a coroner for any incapacity or misbehaviour that rendered him unfit to continue in office.
This would have had the effect of removing the restriction whereby a coroner could be
removed only for misconduct relating to his office as coroner.
2.43 The Committee proposed that only persons with appropriate legal qualifications should
be eligible to act as coroners. The Committee came to this conclusion because of the
quasi-judicial decisions taken by coroners, even outside the formal context of an inquest.
Members of the Committee felt that a lawyer would be better able to assess the value of
evidence, both medical and factual, and would be more likely to command the confidence
of the public because of his independence from the medical profession, on whose
evidence the coroner frequently had to rely. The Committee also suggested that a
medically qualified coroner might be assumed to have a specialist and up-to-date
medical knowledge that in fact he did not possess. Consequently, the Committee came
to the same conclusion as the Wright Committee, namely that possession of a legal, rather
than a medical, qualification was to be preferred. The Brodrick Committee recommended
that the use of police officers as coroner’s officers should be phased out and that they
should be replaced by civilian coroner’s officers and, where necessary, secretarial staff.
The Home Secretary should have a statutory duty to secure the provision of suitable and
sufficient staff and accommodation for the coroner.
2.44 The Committee made a number of other important recommendations about the
procedures for investigation by coroners, as well as the conduct of inquests. In 1976, a
Working Party was set up to consider implementation of the recommendations. The
Working Party reported in October 1977 and April 1980. As a result of its work, some of
the recommendations were implemented.
2.45 However, there has been no substantial change in the way the coronial system is
organised since the Brodrick Committee reported. There has been a significant reduction
in the number of coroners’ districts; as at February 2003, there were 129. But the majority
of coroner appointments continue to be part-time; Home Office figures suggest that there
are currently only 23 full-time coroners. They are still appointed by local authorities, which
60
SHIP03$$14 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
retain responsibility for their remuneration and for the funding of their staff and office (if
any). As I shall explain later in this Report, there have been moves to introduce more
civilian coroner’s officers, but it is still not unusual for coroner’s officers to be serving police
officers, employed and paid by the local police authority. The restrictions on the removal
of coroners remain.
2.46 In the summer of 2001, the Home Office set up the Fundamental Review of Death
Certification and the Coroner Services in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (‘the
Coroners Review’), chaired by Mr Tom Luce. The Coroners Review published a
Consultation Paper in August 2002. In May 2003, it presented its final Report to the Home
Secretary. I shall refer further to that Report and its recommendations in Chapter Nineteen.
61
SHIP03P002 25-06-03 11:39:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 2
CHAPTER THREE
The Origins of the Existing Cremation Certification System
Introduction
3.1 The system of cremation certification has been the subject of controversy for 100 years.
Despite strong differences of view as to its value, the system has survived, virtually
unchanged, during that time. Meanwhile, cremation has become the chosen method of
disposal for the majority of people in the UK. In 1903, the year when the first Cremation
Regulations came into force, there were 477 cremations in the UK; in 2001, there were
427,944. Over 70% of deaths in the UK are now followed by cremation.
3.2 In this Chapter, I shall set out the history of the procedures for cremation certification and
the efforts that have been made over the years to change those procedures. Later in this
Report, it will be necessary for me to consider the part played by the Home Office in the
development and operation of the cremation certification system. For that reason, it has
been necessary to research the history of the system, and the efforts by the Home Office
to change it, in some detail. The Inquiry has had access to a large number of documents
held by the Home Office, tracing its involvement with the cremation procedures over the
last century.
The First Cremations
3.3 Until the late nineteenth century, cremation was virtually unknown in the UK. In 1874, the
Cremation Society of England (‘the Cremation Society’) was formed ‘to promote a more
sanitary,reverent and inexpensive method of disposing of the dead’ than the
traditional means of burial. Shortly afterwards, the Cremation Society purchased a plot of
land at Woking, on which it intended to carry out cremations. The proposal met with fierce
opposition from those living in the neighbourhood. Meanwhile, the Government refused to
give any assurance that persons carrying out a cremation would not be prosecuted and
convicted of an offence against public decency.
3.4 In February 1884, William Price1 was indicted for attempting to burn the body of his child,
instead of burying it; a second indictment charged him with attempting to burn the body
with intent to avoid an inquest. He was acquitted on both charges. In giving his direction
to the grand jury, the Judge, Mr Justice Stephen, expressed his view that, while the
practice of burning the dead might be abhorrent to some, he could not declare it to be
unlawful. He said:
‘Though I think that to burn a dead body decently and inoffensively is not
criminal,it is obvious that if it is done in such a manner as to be offensive
to others it is a nuisance of an aggravated kind.’
3.5 Those words provided the reassurance that the cremation movement had needed. Just
over a year later, the first ‘official’ cremation took place at Woking. There were two more
that year. Thereafter, the number rose steadily. The Cremation Society developed
1 R v Price 1884 12 QBD 247.
63
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
procedures designed to prevent cremation from being used to conceal crime. An
applicant for cremation had to complete a detailed form of application and to obtain two
medical certificates from different doctors, one of whom had attended the deceased. All
three documents then had to be examined by another doctor, the ‘medical referee’. If
satisfied that the certificates disclosed no uncertainty or inconsistency, nor any grounds
for suspicion, the medical referee would give the necessary permission to proceed with
the cremation. If not satisfied that the certificates disclosed no uncertainty or
inconsistency, nor any grounds for suspicion, the medical referee would cause further
enquiries to be made, including, if necessary, an autopsy.
3.6 By 1900, four crematoria were in existence in the UK and the procedures at each of these
were similar to those developed by the Cremation Society. In that year, there were 444
cremations within the UK. Then, as now, some of the crematoria were municipal concerns,
owned and run by local authorities, while others were owned and operated by private
companies.
Statutory Recognition for Cremation
3.7 In 1902, the practice of cremation received statutory recognition. The Cremation Act 1902
gave burial authorities (i.e. burial boards and local authorities having the powers and
duties of a burial board) the power to provide and maintain crematoria. It also placed a
duty on the Home Secretary to make regulations governing the maintenance and
inspection of crematoria and the conduct of cremations, including regulations prescribing
the forms of the notices, certificates and declarations to be given or made before a
cremation was permitted to take place. A Departmental Committee was appointed to
prepare a draft of the Regulations to be made under the 1902 Act.
The Report of the Departmental Committee 1903
3.8 In their Report, published in 1903, the Committee said:
‘... the point which we have considered of prime importance has been to
frame Regulations which,while avoiding unnecessary restrictions such
as might discourage cremation or involve undesirable delay in the
disposal of the body,would reduce to a minimum the risk of cremation
being used to destroy the evidence of murder by violence or poison’.
3.9 As I have described in Chapter Two, the system of registering deaths at this time was
extremely unsatisfactory. The law permitted disposal of a body without prior registration
of the death. Even if a death were registered, there might be no certificate of cause of
death. If a doctor did provide a certificate, he might not have seen the deceased during
the last illness, or indeed at all. Moreover, if the certificate of cause of death was vague
and uncertain in its terms, it was unlikely to be questioned by anyone. The registrar, who
was the only person who would examine it, was not medically qualified and was not
therefore in a strong position to question a certificate, unless it gave rise to an obvious
suggestion of violence or other suspicious circumstances. The Committee referred to
cases where these weaknesses in the system had resulted in burials being used to
64
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
conceal evidence of murder. Its Report also drew attention to the possibility that the
person giving the certificate of cause of death might himself be the murderer. Examples
of killings by doctors were cited and the Committee observed that: ‘... such instances ...
cannot be disregarded’. Its members were therefore anxious to devise a system which
would detect or deter such crimes. However, their Report recognised that no Regulations
could be framed so as to eliminate entirely the risk that cremation might be used for the
concealment of crime.
3.10 The Report described the procedures already devised and operated by the Cremation
Society. The Committee concluded that the second medical certificate required by the
Cremation Society, which was intended to be provided by an independent doctor, did not
achieve the safeguard that had been intended. Despite the requirement that the second
doctor should make ‘careful and separate investigation’, it was recognised that, in some
cases, no such investigation was made and that ‘the certificate usually amounts to little
more than a guarantee by another medical man of the good faith of the practitioner
who signs the first certificate’.
3.11 The Committee also expressed doubt that the wide discretion given to the Cremation
Society’s medical referees (who were practitioners of considerable distinction) could
appropriately be extended to all practitioners who might fulfil the role of medical referee.
Under the Cremation Society’s procedures, the medical referee acted entirely on his own
discretion in making or not making further enquiries about the death. The Committee felt
that, while much must be left to the judgement of individual medical referees, there must
be some uniformity of practice. It was also recognised that, as the number of crematoria
increased, the medical referees appointed to them might not be of the same calibre as had
previously been the case and would therefore require clear rules as to how to proceed.
Accordingly, although the Cremation Society’s procedures formed the basis of the
Committee’s recommendations, the Committee proposed a departure from those
procedures in several important respects.
The Recommendations of the Departmental Committee
3.12 The Committee concluded that responsibility for deciding in each individual case whether
cremation was to be allowed should lie with the medical referee. It decided that the
medical referee should not, in every case, personally investigate the cause of death so as
to reach an independent conclusion on facts that he himself had ascertained.
Considerations of geography made it impracticable for one official to make a personal
investigation in every case. The Committee therefore decided that the medical referee’s
role would have to be confined to the scrutiny of the medical certificates presented in
support of the application to cremate. The medical referee should examine the medical
certificates to ensure that they were satisfactory and, if not so satisfied, he should decline
to allow cremation without an autopsy or a reference to the coroner.
3.13 The Committee observed that, if it were practicable for medical referees to conduct a
personal investigation in every case, it might be possible to dispense with the second
certificate. However, since it was not practicable, the Committee felt that the second
certificate must be retained. Members of the Committee considered the situation where a
65
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
doctor committed murder and subsequently completed the first cremation certificate.
That certificate would certainly be good on its face and would therefore be accepted
without question by a medical referee who was merely carrying out a scrutiny of the
certificates presented in support of the application to cremate. Some further safeguard
was required, particularly since cremation of a body precluded the possibility of recovery
of the body for future inspection. They proposed that the additional safeguard should
consist of an investigation by a second doctor. An independent investigation could not,
of course, be guaranteed to reveal evidence of such a crime, but would, the Committee
believed, reduce the risk of concealment.
3.14 The Committee therefore recommended that, before cremation was permitted, there
should be a personal investigation by a doctor other than the medical attendant of the
deceased. The investigation might be carried out by the medical referee. If that were
not possible, it should be conducted by an independent medical practitioner. That
practitioner should be nominated for the purpose by the cremation authority or should
hold the appointment of medical officer of health, police surgeon, certifying factory
surgeon or medical referee under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. It was pointed out
that the last three categories of medical practitioners had special experience of cases
of death by violence. Physicians and surgeons on the consulting staff of the larger public
general hospitals were added to the list of those recommended for eligibility to
investigate and provide a second medical certificate. The intention was that the second
certifier should be demonstrably independent and of good standing in the medical
profession.
3.15 If the medical referee were not satisfied that the two medical certificates showed the cause
of death definitely, and in terms such as to exclude the possibility of poison or violence as
the cause of death, an autopsy should be held. This should be conducted, the Committee
said, by a medical practitioner experienced in pathology, who had been appointed by the
cremation authority. If the autopsy revealed a sufficient cause of death, the cremation
should be allowed. If it did not, and the relatives still wished for a cremation, the case
should be referred to the coroner for an inquest. Even if the cause of death had been
definitely ascertained, the death should be referred to the coroner if there were any
suspicious circumstances surrounding it.
3.16 The Committee requested that its proposed Regulations should be regarded as
provisional. It recommended that, as the experience of cremation increased, the
Regulations might require simplification or, if weaknesses emerged, more rigid rules
might be needed. Looking to the future, the Committee said:
‘We look forward to the possibility that ultimately the whole question of
death certification and of the disposal of the dead may be brought in
every district under the control of some public officer,either the Coroner
or the Medical Officer of Health ...’.
3.17 In other words, exactly 100 years ago, the Committee was advocating what has been
called in the course of this Inquiry a ‘one-stop shop’, covering all the formalities of death
and cremation certification.
66
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
The Cremation Regulations 1903
3.18 The Cremation Regulations 1903 reproduced, in virtually identical terms, the draft
Regulations recommended by the Departmental Committee that had reported a short time
before. Draft forms were prescribed. Those relevant for the purposes of this Report are:
- the Application for Cremation (Form A), to be completed by the person applying for
the cremation, usually the deceased’s executor or nearest surviving relative. The
contents of this form had to be confirmed by statutory declaration
- the Certificate of Medical Attendant (Form B), to be completed by a doctor who had
attended the deceased before death and had seen and identified the body after
death
- the Confirmatory Medical Certificate (Form C), to be completed by a second doctor
who was the holder of one of the public appointments referred to at paragraph 3.14
- the Certificate after Post-Mortem Examination (Form D), to be completed by a
pathologist who was directed by the medical referee to conduct a post-mortem
examination
- the Coroner’s Certificate (Form E), to be completed by a coroner who had held an
inquest on the body of the deceased and was satisfied that no circumstance existed
which could render necessary any further examination of the remains or any analysis
of any part of the body
- the Authority to Cremate (Form F), to be completed by the medical referee who was
satisfied that all the requirements of the Cremation Act and Regulations had been
complied with, that the cause of death had been definitely ascertained and that there
existed no reason for any further enquiry or examination.
The Period from 1904 to 1930
3.19 Between 1904 and 1930, the 1903 Regulations were amended several times. However,
the procedure for obtaining authority to cremate remained essentially the same as that
devised by the Departmental Committee that had reported in 1903.
3.20 The Cremation Regulations of 1930 made a number of changes. The most important of
these was the removal of the requirement that the second (Form C) doctor should be
appointed by the cremation authority or hold one of the categories of appointment
previously specified. By 1930, the annual figure for cremations in the UK had increased
to 4533. Many of the 21 crematoria then in existence covered large geographical areas.
It had become difficult to find sufficient doctors with the requisite qualifications to sign the
number of confirmatory certificates required. Those who were eligible to sign Forms C
were, it was said, inclined to claim a monopoly and to charge unduly high fees.
3.21 It was decided that the previous rule should be relaxed. At first, the Home Office proposed
that each cremation authority should appoint a panel of suitable doctors (drawn from a
wider pool of eligible candidates than previously), who would be authorised to complete
Forms C. However, the cremation authorities opposed this idea and Home Office officials
67
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
were reluctant to impose upon them a requirement to operate a panel system. The
counter-proposal put forward by the cremation authorities was therefore accepted,
namely that the doctor completing Form C should be a registered medical practitioner of
not less than five years’ standing and should not be a relative of the deceased or a relative
or partner of the Form B doctor.
3.22 By 1930, the Home Office had become concerned that the system of appointing medical
referees had broken down. It was decided that the Department must exercise some
control over appointments, in order to preserve the original purpose of the system as a
precaution against the risk of Form B being carelessly or corruptly completed by the
attending doctor. Accordingly, the power of appointment of medical referees and deputy
medical referees was transferred from cremation authorities to the Home Secretary, who
was to appoint ‘such fit persons’ as may be nominated by the cremation authority. It is not
clear whether the Home Office ever put in place any mechanism by which it could properly
exercise its power of appointment. If there ever was such a mechanism, it cannot have
been maintained for long. I shall return to this topic later in this Chapter.
3.23 After the passage of the 1930 Regulations, it was no doubt hoped that doctors would be
more modest with regard to the fees charged for completing cremation certificates,
particularly Form C. No step was taken at that time to exercise any control over those fees
and they have continued to be a source of concern ever since. They have come to be
known colloquially, and unattractively, as ‘ash cash’.
The Period from 1930 to 1950
3.24 During the period between 1930 and 1950, considerable doubts were expressed about
the value of the certificate given by the second doctor. Reports submitted by medical
referees to the Home Office in 1935 suggested that doctors habitually completed Forms
C without making the personal investigation that had been intended by the Regulations.
As a consequence, some medical referees thought the form of little practical value. There
were particular problems with the completion of Forms C by hospital doctors.
3.25 In 1935, as now, Form C (as prescribed by the 1930 Regulations) contained the following
questions:
‘1 Have you seen the body of the deceased?
2 Have you carefully examined the body externally?
3 Have you made a post-mortem examination?
4 Have you seen and questioned the medical practitioner who gave
the above certificate [Form B]?
5 Have you seen and questioned any other medical practitioner who
attended the deceased?
6 Have you seen and questioned any person who nursed the deceased
during his last illness,or who was present at the death?
68
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
7 Have you seen and questioned any of the relatives of the deceased?
8 Have you seen and questioned any other person?
(In the answers to questions 5,6,7,and 8,give names and addresses of
persons seen and say whether you saw them alone.)’
3.26 The prescribed form contained no requirement that any of the questions on Form C should
be answered in the affirmative as a prerequisite to the giving of authority to cremate. Thus,
for example, there was no requirement that the Form C doctor should examine (or even
view) the body, speak to the Form B doctor or question anyone else with knowledge of the
circumstances of the death.
3.27 The reports of the medical referees, submitted in 1935, suggested that there was no
uniform practice in the completion of Forms C. Most doctors would at least view the body
of the deceased and speak to the doctor who had completed Form B, before issuing the
confirmatory certificate. However, an examination of the deceased’s body was by no
means universal and some doctors, it was said, signed Form C without discussing the
death with the Form B doctor.
3.28 As for questions 5–8 of Form C, it appeared that some doctors invariably answered ‘No’
to all of them. The practice among medical referees plainly varied as to the extent of
information that they required to be given by the Form C doctor before authorising the
cremation. The suggestion was made that some medical referees might be giving
authorisation even in the face of negative responses to all eight questions on Form C.
3.29 In October 1935, following analysis of the reports, a letter was written on behalf of the
Home Secretary to all medical referees, reminding them of the original purpose for which
Form C was devised, i.e. ‘... as a safeguard against cremation being used to conceal
crime ...’ by ensuring that ‘a personal inquiry’ was carried out in every case by someone
besides the medical attendant of the deceased. The letter expressed the Home
Secretary’s view that, as a general rule, no Form C should be accepted unless the answers
to questions 1, 2 and 4 were in the affirmative. Medical referees were enjoined to
remember that Form C was ‘an essential safeguard in the system of cremation devised
in the public interest’. Nothing was said in the letter about questions 5–8.
3.30 A Home Office memorandum of 1937 records an official’s view that a committee should
be set up to review the working of the Cremation Act and Regulations and to report on any
changes that might be desirable. The author pointed to ambiguities in the wording of Form
B and suggested that a footnote should be added to Form C, to the effect that answers
to questions 1, 2 and 4 should generally be in the affirmative. Other changes were also
proposed.
3.31 The memorandum went on to discuss the possibility of abolition of Form C. The author
observed:
‘There appears in some degree to have been a return to the system of the
Cremation Society in 1902,and the value of certificate C seems
nowadays to depend very largely upon the doctor giving it to do his work
properly.’
69
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
If Form C were abolished, it was suggested that more work and responsibility would be
placed upon medical referees. The need to guard against the use of cremation to conceal
crime was again noted. It was anticipated that, as the number of cremations increased,
the knowledge and experience of the medical referees would increase also. The fact that
the medical referees appointed to the new, local authority-owned crematoria were, in
general, medical officers of health was also thought to be a positive step. The author of
the memorandum believed that, if medical referees were given greater responsibility, they
were likely to discharge it conscientiously. He pointed out that it was in their interests (as
appointees of the crematoria) to do so, since ‘nothing would be more detrimental to the
interests of cremation than the occurrence of a case in which cremation had been
used for the concealment of a crime’.
3.32 In the event, no steps were taken to set up a committee at that time. It was not until ten
years later, after the end of the Second World War, that it was decided that the time had
come for a thorough review of the system of controlling cremation. This was thought
appropriate, in particular, in the light of the desire, expressed in the Departmental
Committee’s Report of 1903, that the system devised by that Committee should be
regarded as provisional only. In 1947, an Interdepartmental Cremation Committee was set
up under the chairmanship of Mr Austin (later Sir Austin) Strutt, a Home Office official. In
that year, there were no fewer than 61,160 cremations in the UK and representations were
being made by the organisations responsible for running the crematoria (‘the cremation
organisations’) that the Regulations should be relaxed. In particular, the Cremation
Council of Great Britain (which incorporated the Cremation Society and the Federation of
British Cremation Authorities) was pressing for the abolition of Form C, on the grounds that
it served no useful purpose and, by adding to the complexity and expense of applying for
cremation, served as a deterrent against that means of disposal. However, that view was
countered by public concern which had been awakened by press coverage of a case
where a doctor had been suspected of murdering his wife. Because she had been
cremated, no proper investigation into the death could be conducted.
The Report of the Interdepartmental Committee
3.33 The Committee reported in 1950. It recommended the removal of the requirement that the
particulars stated in Form A should be confirmed by statutory declaration. Some changes
to Form B were proposed. In particular, it was recommended that it should no longer be
necessary for the doctor completing Form B to have attended the deceased during
his/her last illness, provided that the doctor had visited the deceased within 14 days and
was able to certify the cause of death ‘to the best of his knowledge or belief’.
3.34 The Committee’s Report summarised the arguments put for and against the abolition of
Form C. On the one hand, the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP), the Coroners’ Society
of England and Wales (the Coroners’ Society), the British Medical Association (BMA), a
number of medical referees and the director of a forensic science laboratory all advocated
retention of the requirement for Form C. The BMA said that the completion of Form C was
‘a public duty that the medical profession should be required to take seriously’. The
Coroners’ Society saw Form C as an additional precaution and suggested that it should
be ‘revised and slightly strengthened’.
70
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
3.35 In favour of abolition were the cremation organisations, the Society of Medical Officers of
Health and other medical referees. They pointed to the ‘perfunctory manner’ in which
Form C was completed in the majority of cases and to the equally perfunctory way in which
doctors carried out their examination of bodies before completing Form C. It was said that
the charges levied by doctors for completing Form C were a deterrent to choosing
cremation as a means of disposal. Those arguing for abolition also pointed out that, in
almost 50 years, no case had occurred in which the enquiry necessitated by Form C had
led to the detection of a crime.
3.36 The Committee nevertheless recommended that Form C should be retained. The Report
proposed that any new Regulations ‘... should be so worded as to make it a duty on the
person giving the confirmatory certificate to answer the questions properly and
effectively’. The Committee also recommended that Form C should be redesigned, so as
to combine the functions of both Form C and Form F (the medical referee’s authority to
cremate). The Committee proposed a return to the previous system, whereby doctors
completing Forms C were required to hold a prestigious public appointment. It was
recommended that the doctor completing the new-style Form C should be of clearly
recognised status, such as a medical officer of health, and should be assisted by a panel
of practitioners specially selected by the cremation authority. In the case of a hospital
death, it was proposed that the new Form C should be completed by the Medical
Superintendent of the hospital or his deputy. It was also recommended that fees for
completing Forms B and C should be standardised.
3.37 The effect of the Committee’s recommendations was that there would be no future need
for a medical referee or deputy medical referee. The doctor issuing Form C would give
authority to cremate, except in cases where the death had been referred to the coroner
and the coroner had issued Form E. In such cases, Form E would operate as the authority
to cremate.
3.38 The Report suggested that, if cremation became more common (e.g. if cremation
followed, say, 50% of deaths), it might well be necessary to consider whether the
procedures for burial and cremation should be more closely assimilated.
The Period from 1950 to 1952
3.39 After publication of the Interdepartmental Committee’s Report, it fell to the Home Office to
consider implementation of the proposals contained in the Report. The cremation
organisations were disappointed at the proposal to retain Form C and the BMA was firmly
opposed to the abolition of the post of medical referee. The BMA expressed doubts about
the suitability of medical officers of health to complete the new Form C, having regard to
their lack of recent experience of clinical practice. Doubts were also expressed about the
desirability of creating a panel of Form C doctors. If a limited number of panel members
were to be selected from the existing pool of doctors eligible to sign Forms C, it was said
that this might lead to delay and difficulty in obtaining completed Forms C. On the other
hand, if all or most of those practitioners already eligible to sign Forms C were to become
members of the panel, no advantage would be achieved. The BMA also observed that
relatives would prefer a private practitioner, rather than an official, to come to their home
71
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
to make any necessary enquiries before completing Form C; this, of course, presupposed
that the certifying doctor would question relatives as part of his investigation before
signing Form C.
3.40 During 1950 and 1951, the Home Office held a number of meetings with the various
interest groups to discuss possible implementation of the changes; the discussions with
the BMA included consideration of the level of fees which should be paid to doctors
signing Forms B and C. In early January 1952, Mr Howat, who was an official at the
Department of Health for Scotland and had been a member of the Interdepartmental
Committee, wrote to Mr Strutt. Mr Howat expressed concern at a proposal to agree fees
with the BMA without securing the agreement of the BMA to implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee. In his letter, Mr Howat said this:
‘If Form C. is to remain,then our first task is to see that it is an honest
certificate. I doubt whether its completion by doctors in the present
climate is worth five shillings much less two guineas. To give two
guineas to a doctor who walks into a room and looks casually (but
sympathetically,of course) at a body in a coffin and then walks out,is
to my mind just wickedness. I would therefore urge that before fees are
further considered we should undertake the revision of Form C. and the
preparation of a memorandum describing what the doctor should do
about it. Having done that,we could consider again what is the true
worth of the Form.’
3.41 Mr Strutt’s draft response to Mr Howat expressed the general feeling within the Home
Office which, after ‘considerable reflection and with great reluctance’, he had
accepted, that the procedural changes recommended by the Committee would not work
well in practice. It had been decided that the existing arrangements should be preserved,
for the time being at least. Mr Strutt expressed the view that, ‘... if the present system is
to be perpetuated in any revised Regulations we ought to do all we [can] to see that
doctors giving Form C do so in the manner and as intended by the Regulations ...’.
3.42 In the event, that draft response was never sent, since a Private Member’s Bill, which
included a clause empowering the Home Secretary to fix fees for doctors’ certificates, was
introduced and it was deemed appropriate to delay further discussions until the
procedures relating to the Bill had been completed. That Bill became the Cremation Act
1952. It gave power to the Home Secretary to prescribe the fees charged by doctors for
issuing Forms B and C, a power that has never been exercised. Instead, the fees charged
are those recommended by the BMA. No action was taken pursuant to Mr Howat’s
suggestion of a memorandum, setting out the duties of doctors in relation to Form C.
3.43 Regulations also made in 1952 removed the requirement for a statutory declaration to
confirm the contents of Form A. Instead, the form was to be countersigned by a person
employed in one of a number of specified professions.
The Cremation Working Party
3.44 After 1952, the number of cremations continued to rise steeply. In 1957, 28.4% of deaths
in Great Britain were followed by cremation. The cremation organisations continued to
72
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
press for simplification of the Regulations, in particular abolition of Form C. In 1958, the
Home Office decided to set up a Working Party, charged with the task of producing draft
revised Cremation Regulations. The Working Party, which began its work in 1959,
included among its members representatives from some of the organisations actively
involved in the day-to-day operation of the cremation procedures.
3.45 The most difficult issue facing the Working Party was what to do about Form C. The
Working Party took evidence from a number of organisations, among them the cremation
organisations, the Association of Clinical Pathologists, the Association of Crematorium
Medical Referees and the BMA.
3.46 The Association of Clinical Pathologists recognised the possibility that either the
deceased’s medical attendant or the deceased’s family might be criminally involved in the
death of the deceased. The Association construed ‘criminal involvement’ as including
concealment of negligence in the treatment of the deceased. They took the view that the
purpose of the Form C investigation was to perform a cross-check of the accounts given
by the deceased’s family and the Form B doctor. The Association stressed that questions
5 and 6 (which ask whether the second doctor has questioned any other medical
practitioner who has treated the deceased or anyone who has nursed the deceased or
was present at the death) were ‘essential if any check is to be made on the attending
practitioner’. The Association believed that no proper check was in fact being performed.
It was said that, in some cases, examination of the deceased’s body might involve merely
looking at the face. The doctor completing Form C was frequently a personal friend of the
Form B doctor and ‘was naturally reluctant to act inquisitorially’. The Association
doubted whether, having been ‘so badly abused’, Form C could ever be ‘restored to
usefulness’. Consequently, the Association suggested that Form C should be discarded
and that the role of the medical referee should be strengthened by appointing better
qualified medical referees with more time to devote to the task of actively investigating
deaths. In addition, the Association suggested that registrars should be encouraged to
obtain information from relatives and to communicate this, where appropriate, to the
medical referee, thus providing an informal checking mechanism.
3.47 I note, in passing, an extract taken from the Association’s memorandum to the Working
Party, written in 1959, where it was said:
‘It might be worthy of consideration as to whether the Referee could not
be in some way associated with the Coroner thereby linking the two so
that reference of cases could be easily and expeditiously employed. The
whole might ultimately be linked with a medico legal service serving the
Coroner in a capacity now occupied by individual pathologists,forensic
scientists,serologists,etc. The Referee being a trained forensic
pathologist.’
The similarity of that suggestion, put forward 44 years ago, to the idea for an integrated
coroner service that this Inquiry has been considering is striking.
3.48 The Association of Crematorium Medical Referees regarded Form C as a valuable
safeguard. However, the Association was anxious to see complete independence, both
73
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
social and professional, of the Form C from the Form B doctor. Representatives of the
Association suggested that future regulations should make clear what degree of
association between the doctors was and was not acceptable. The Association was not,
however, in favour of the creation of a panel of Form C doctors, as recommended in the
Interdepartmental Committee’s Report of 1950. Their objections were based on practical
grounds and on the assertion that it was to be expected that ‘many practitioners would
bitterly resent certain of their colleagues being called in to question the relatives of
the deceased’. The Association expressed the view that it was undesirable, except where
a case was referred to the coroner, for Form C to be completed without interviewing the
relatives. Concern was expressed that the practice of removing bodies to the premises
of funeral directors before the attendance of the Form C doctor was having the effect of
discouraging Form C doctors from interviewing relatives.
3.49 Having considered the evidence, the Working Party concluded that the existing system
should be retained and Form C strengthened and improved. That conclusion essentially
accorded with the submissions made to the Working Party by the BMA, which supported
retention of the existing system, with a revised Form C.
3.50 The BMA had stressed the importance of ascertaining the cause of death accurately, not
only to prevent the concealment of crime but also to ensure the quality of mortality
statistics. A minute of comments made to the Working Party by the BMA representative,
Dr John Havard, reads:
‘... the purpose of the Cremation Regulations was not so much to
ascertain the fatal disease from which the deceased had been suffering
as to determine what caused death. It was only too easy to help an old
and chronic invalid out of the world. Although the Form B doctor was
in an excellent position to give an opinion as to the nature of the fatal
illness,it was essential to confirm his opinion on the actual cause of
death. At present the potential criminal was deterred by the knowledge
that a second examination by an independent doctor with questioning
of relatives,nurses etc. would take place in every [his emphasis]
case.’
3.51 In fact, even at the time when those remarks were made, the questioning by the Form C
doctor of persons other than the Form B doctor was far from being standard practice. The
evidence of the Association of Crematorium Medical Referees, whose members were
inspecting completed Forms C on a daily basis, made that clear.
3.52 Revised Regulations were drafted, together with revised cremation forms. It was
proposed that the revised Form C should be a more searching document than previously.
It required a full external examination of the body of the deceased and asked a series of
questions about that examination. The form asked the certifying doctor to describe any
external marks on the body indicating recent violence or injury and to state an opinion as
to their cause, in particular whether they were consistent with the cause of death as stated.
The form also asked whether there were any skin puncture marks and, if so, whether they
were consistent with the treatment stated on Form B. The form asked, as previously,
whether the certifying doctor had consulted with any other doctor (other than the Form B
74
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
doctor) or with any person who had nursed the deceased or a relative. However,
affirmative answers to these questions were not mandatory. Finally, the certifying doctor
was asked whether there was any feature of the illness or death which he wished to draw
to the attention of the medical referee. The revised form represented an attempt to ensure
that Form C doctors carried out a more rigorous investigation. In particular, it was intended
to ensure that they performed a careful examination of the body. However, it was destined
never to come into use.
3.53 The draft Regulations were circulated in June 1962 and a period of consultation followed.
This was protracted and produced the familiar division of opinion. The DPP and the police
were in favour of retention of Form C, which they regarded as a deterrent against crime.
The BMA and the Association of Crematorium Medical Referees also supported retention.
On the other side, the cremation organisations criticised the newly designed Form C as
unwieldy; they contended that its complexity was likely to lead to it being completed in an
even more perfunctory manner than previously. They continued to press for abolition of
Form C or, as an alternative, an amalgamation of Forms B and C, requiring the signature
of one doctor only. No agreement was possible and it was necessary for a ministerial
decision to be made. In February 1964, the Home Secretary announced his decision that
Form C should be retained.
3.54 Later in 1964, the decision was taken to set up a Committee (the Brodrick Committee) to
examine the systems of death certification and coroners. It was decided that, because of
the close relationship between the procedures governing death and cremation
certification, the latter should be included in the Committee’s Terms of Reference. As a
consequence, the attempt at a complete overhaul of the Cremation Regulations was
scaled down.
3.55 The Cremation Regulations 1965 were of limited scope. They permitted Form A to be
countersigned by a householder, in place of a member of one of the professions specified
in the Cremation Act 1952. They also gave the coroner power to issue Form E after opening
(rather than holding) an inquest. This enabled a body to be cremated before the inquest
was concluded.
The Report of the Brodrick Committee
3.56 The Brodrick Committee was set up in March 1965. It reported to the Home Secretary six
and a half years later, in September 1971.
3.57 In its Report, the Committee discussed the BMA paper ‘Deaths in the Community’, which
had been published in 1964. In particular, the Committee dealt with the suggestion that
homicides were passing undetected through the existing certification systems. That
suggestion was based on a book, ‘The Detection of Secret Homicide’,2 by Dr John
Havard. Dr Havard was at that time Assistant Secretary (later Secretary) of the BMA and
played a prominent part in its dealings with the Home Office over a period of several
decades. I referred to comments made by him at paragraph 3.50.
2 Havard, JDJ (1960) ‘The Detection of Secret Homicide’, Cambridge Studies in Criminology, Vol XI. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
75
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
3.58 The Brodrick Committee took the view that:
‘... the risk of secret homicide occurring and remaining undiscovered as
a direct consequence of the state of the current law on the certification
of death has been much exaggerated ...’.
3.59 The Committee reached that view, having noted that:
(a) A review of 28,108 autopsies carried out on behalf of coroners in the five-year period
1963 to 1967 had revealed that 263 of these autopsies had resulted in findings of
unnatural death, despite the fact that the initial report (from a doctor or coroner’s
officer) suggested that the death had been due to natural causes or did not state a
contrary opinion. Of those 263 deaths, one proved to be a case of homicide and, in
17 others (all deaths of infants), violence appeared to have played a part in the death.
The Committee was evidently reassured by the fact that those 18 cases were
identified for further investigation by the existing system. The Committee did not
comment on the fact that the review shed no light on the pattern of death among
cases that were not reported to the coroner.
(b) An examination of all (more than 400) cases of homicide or suspected homicide
investigated by the police in 1965 and 1967 had revealed that not one of those
deaths had been prematurely or wrongly registered. Investigations into the deaths
had begun in all the cases before the stage of certification and registration was
reached.
(c) Of 20 exhumations ordered over a period of ten years, only one resulted in a criminal
conviction for homicide and that had been treated as suspicious from the first; the
body was exhumed for a second autopsy in an effort to obtain additional medical
evidence. During that ten-year period, some 5,500,000 deaths and 2,350,000 burials
had taken place. The Committee did, however, refer to a case which had occurred
outside the period of their review and in which, as a result of evidence gained from
autopsies conducted after exhumations, a woman who may have murdered four
husbands was found guilty of murdering two of them.
(d) Records showed that, in 90% of cases, the doctor completing the MCCD saw the
deceased’s body after death. The coroner made an enquiry in 20% of deaths. In
more than 25% of deaths, an autopsy was carried out. The Committee felt that these
factors were powerful deterrents to a would-be murderer.
(e) The evidence of witnesses did not support the existence of a significant risk.
3.60 The Committee observed:
‘We do not say that there is no possibility whatever of a homicide being
concealed under the present procedure for certifying deaths. What we
do say is that,balancing all the relevant factors and observable
probabilities,there is no requirement to strengthen the present
machinery of death certification simply in order more efficiently to
prevent or detect secret homicide. So far as detection of homicide is a
76
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
relevant objective,the present certification system has worked as
satisfactorily as any modern community could reasonably expect.
Advances in medical science (and forensic medicine) are likely to
maintain that position. Our task,therefore,has been to make sure that,
in the future system of death certification,an autopsy will be performed
in all cases in which there is any doubt about the medical cause of death
or suspicion about the circumstances in which the death occurred.’
3.61 The Report went on to consider the specific risk associated with concealment of homicide
by the attending doctor. It referred to the general risk, which the Committee considered
was ‘extremely small’, and observed:
‘... there is no reason — to put it at its lowest — to think that the risk of
homicide by doctors is higher than for any other profession. Apart from
this the arguments call in question the quality and to some extent the
morality of professional conduct. They also depend for much of their
force on the assumption that relatives,friends and others with
knowledge of or interest in the death are likely to remain silent if they are
dissatisfied with the conduct of the certifying doctor.’
3.62 It is easy now to see that the Brodrick Committee was wrong to conclude that the risk of
secret homicide was negligible. That conclusion was to underlie its whole approach to the
question of reform. Since the discovery of Shipman’s crimes, we know that the risk of
homicide by doctors is a real one, although it may occur only rarely. The Brodrick
Committee had only the suggestion, made in the BMA paper, that homicides were passing
undetected. They concluded, on the basis of the evidence they had examined, that the
BMA suggestion was unduly alarmist. I do feel bound to observe that the research on
which the Brodrick Committee relied could not, on careful analysis, have satisfied its
members that the risk of concealed homicide was minimal. They examined only deaths
that had come to the attention of the coroner or the police. They did not consider whether
or not there might be concealed homicides that had never come to the attention of either
agency, i.e. cases of the Shipman kind. They were also confident that the family of a
deceased whose doctor had done something wrong would recognise this and express
dissatisfaction. That confidence can now be seen to have been misplaced. None of the
relatives of Shipman’s victims expressed concern to an official body at the time of the
relevant death. Those few who felt any such concern felt inhibited from making it known.
3.63 In any event, it was against the background of the conclusion that the risk of concealed
homicide was minimal that the Brodrick Committee set about its examination of all aspects
of the existing systems. Many of the criticisms of those systems made to the Committee
were reiterated to this Inquiry more than 30 years later.
3.64 Having reviewed the arrangements for cremation certification, the Committee observed
that the process of certification appeared to operate without undue difficulty or delay.
Indeed, the Committee concluded that, if judged solely by the test of convenience to the
public, the existing system could be said to be generally satisfactory.
3.65 However, those actively involved in the operation of the system expressed widely
disparate views about its efficiency and value. The cremation organisations and the
77
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
National Association of Funeral Directors took the view that the whole process should be
simplified. They recognised that, if that were done, it would be necessary to have a
‘stronger’ certificate than the existing MCCD; in particular, it would be necessary to have
a certificate which required the certifying doctor to examine the body after death. Thus,
they were content for Form B (with some modifications) to be retained. However, they saw
little value in Form C, except where it was provided by an experienced hospital pathologist
following an autopsy. They relied, as in the past, on evidence of the perfunctory manner
in which many doctors carried out their enquiries before completing Form C. They
maintained their contention that Form C should be abolished.
3.66 On the other hand, the BMA again contended that the involvement of three doctors in the
cremation certification process was an essential safeguard against the destruction of
evidence of crime or neglect. Its representatives argued that the existing requirement that
the medical referee should be satisfied that the cause of death had been ‘definitely
ascertained’ provided a further safeguard. The BMA did not accept that doctors were
failing to carry out proper enquiries before completing Form C. The BMA described Form
C as the ‘lynch-pin’ of the cremation certification process and ‘a vital safeguard’.
3.67 Representatives of the Association of Crematorium Medical Referees told the Brodrick
Committee that they were generally content with the existing system. They supported the
retention of Form C. They believed that the completion of Form C, by a doctor
unconnected with the Form B doctor, encouraged greater care in the assessment of the
cause of death. They also pointed out that interviews (conducted pursuant to question 6
of Form C) with those who had nursed the deceased, or who had been present at the
death, could bring to light ‘sources of dissatisfaction and anxiety’ which should be
taken into account before completing Form C.
3.68 The Police Federation, the Coroners’ Society and individual pathologists all stressed the
need for safeguards against the concealment of crime to be contained within any system
of cremation certification. However, they believed that Form C should be dispensed with
and replaced by something better.
3.69 Views about the degree of care with which medical referees carried out their duties also
differed. The organisations representing the medical profession and crematorium
medical referees were adamant that, in general, referees carried out their duties
conscientiously and provided a genuine safeguard against crime. However,
representatives of the cremation organisations and funeral directors suggested that, in
many cases, the issuing of the authority to cremate was virtually automatic on production
of the appropriate documentation.
The Conclusions of the Brodrick Committee
3.70 The Brodrick Committee concluded that Form B, while far from perfect, served a valuable
purpose in concentrating the attending doctor’s mind on the need to describe the medical
cause of death accurately and on the need to consider whether there was any factor or
circumstance which would make it desirable that a further examination of the body should
be carried out. The evidence which the Committee had received suggested that Form B
was, in general, adequately completed by doctors, although doubts were expressed
78
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
about the thoroughness with which the physical examination of the body, if performed,
was conducted.
3.71 As to Form C, research into practice at four crematoria in different parts of the country
revealed the extent to which doctors had recorded on Form C that they had questioned
persons other than the Form B doctor. For deaths occurring outside hospital, the
percentage of deaths where the Form C doctor claimed to have seen and questioned a
person who had nursed the deceased during the last illness or been present at the death
varied between 52.6% and 89.6%. At one crematorium, there was no death in respect of
which a Form C doctor had recorded having questioned relatives. It is highly likely,
however, that some relatives had also given nursing care or been present at the death and
had therefore been referred to in response to the preceding question. At another
crematorium, relatives had been questioned in connection with 86.1% of deaths. There
was little evidence of questions being asked of anyone other than nurses, those present
at the death or relatives.
3.72 Because of the way in which the figures were presented, it is impossible to ascertain in
what percentage of cases the certifying doctor had questioned a person falling within one
of the four categories referred to in questions 5–8 of Form C. We now know (although it
appears that the Brodrick Committee did not) that, at some crematoria, it has long been a
requirement that the Form C doctor must have questioned someone other than the Form
B doctor before authority for cremation is given. At other crematoria, no such requirement
exists. That may account for the differences in practice between the four crematoria
examined by the Brodrick Committee. I shall return to this topic in due course. Meanwhile,
it is perhaps interesting to note that, in 1967 and 1968 (the years covered by the
information), persons other than the Form B doctor were questioned in relation to deaths
occurring outside hospital in more than 50% of cases at each of the four crematoria
studied. In the absence of any requirement on the face of Form C to do so, the proportion
today would be very significantly lower, negligible in some places.
3.73 The Committee observed that, in order for a completed Form C to be valid, and authority
to cremate to be given, it was not necessary for any of the eight questions which Form C
contained to be answered in the affirmative. It is true that the 1930 Regulations imposed
no such requirement and no such requirement is contained on the form as prescribed.
However, in practice, no standard version of Form C is issued and each crematorium
produces its own. Over the years, some of these forms have come to include various
explanatory marginal notes and other additional material. The Forms C issued by most, if
not all, crematoria in England and Wales contain a note to the effect that affirmative
answers should invariably be provided to questions 1, 2 and 4 (relating to whether the
Form C doctor has viewed and examined the body and seen and questioned the Form B
doctor). That would no doubt account for the fact that, at all four of the crematoria about
which the Brodrick Committee had information, there was 100% affirmative response to
those questions.
3.74 The Committee went on to observe that the Form C doctor, who knew nothing about the
death, had two choices. Either he could complete Form C merely by reproducing the
information provided by the Form B doctor or he could make extensive enquiries of his
79
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
own. Members of the Committee concluded that most doctors chose the first alternative.
They expressed concern about the failure to make enquiries personally, when coupled
with the evidence that physical examination of the deceased by Form C doctors was
frequently inadequate or non-existent. Thus, they observed, there was no independent
element to the enquiry made by the Form C doctor.
3.75 The Committee concluded that, except where Form C was completed after an autopsy, it
amounted to ‘no more than a statement of confidence in the judgement of the Form
B doctor’. It will be recalled that this was a view that had been expressed by the 1903
Departmental Committee almost 70 years previously in relation to the Cremation Society
procedures then in existence.
3.76 Information provided to the Brodrick Committee by crematorium medical referees
demonstrated that they rarely used their powers to order an autopsy, to report a death
to the coroner or to decline to allow a cremation for other reasons. The Brodrick
Report recorded that, in 1966, there were 260,685 cremations (other information
contained in the Brodrick Report and provided to the Inquiry by the Cremation Society
of Great Britain suggests the figure may have been slightly higher). Out of that number,
there were 136 cases where a medical referee ordered an autopsy, 171 cases where
the death was reported by the medical referee to the coroner and 13 where a medical
referee declined to allow a cremation. A small number of medical referees accounted
for the vast majority of these cases; for example, the medical referee at Liverpool had
referred 103 (out of the total of 171) deaths to the coroner in 1966.
3.77 The Committee concluded that, for most of the time and in most places, the giving of
authority to cremate was little more than a formality following receipt of Forms B and C.
Most medical referees did not have the time or the facilities to do more than satisfy
themselves that the Form B doctor was in a position (having regard to the history of his
dealings with the patient as disclosed on Form B) to diagnose the cause of death. The
Committee observed that the system would have broken down long before if medical
referees had taken a strict view of their responsibilities and had ‘assumed that they were
the first and last line of defence against undetected homicide’. The Committee drew
attention to the difficulties and anomalies of the role of medical referee, to which I shall
refer later in this Report. In the Committee’s view:
‘It is hard to see that,in his present isolated role of ‘‘long-stop’’ against
a threat which we believe to be virtually non-existent,the medical referee
has a place within the integrated system of death certification and
disposal which we have set ourselves to achieve.’
The Recommendations of the Brodrick Committee
3.78 The Brodrick Committee proposed the wholesale abolition of the existing system of
cremation certification. In doing so, the Committee pointed out that there was no evidence
that the procedure had ever led directly to the exposure of a previously unsuspected
crime. The effect of the recommendation was that all deaths not reported to the coroner
would be dealt with alike, regardless of whether disposal was by burial or cremation.
80
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
3.79 Changes in the procedures relating to the certification of the medical cause of death were
also recommended. In that regard, the Committee proposed that:
(a) The remit of the certificate should be extended to cover both the fact and the cause
of death. In 1971 (as now), there was no official mechanism for recording the fact that
death had been diagnosed.
(b) The certifying doctor should be fully registered. In 1971 (as now), a provisionally
registered doctor could certify the cause of death and problems had been caused
by such inexperienced doctors performing the task unsupervised.
(c) The certifying doctor should have seen the deceased at least once during the seven
days before death. In 1971 (as now), the relevant period was 14 days.
(d) The certifying doctor should be obliged to inspect the body before certifying the fact
and cause of death. In 1971 (as now), the doctor was not required to inspect the body
after death if he had seen the deceased within the 14 days preceding death.
(e) The certifying doctor should issue the certificate only if ‘confident on reasonable
grounds that he can certify the medical cause of death with accuracy and
precision’. This was to replace the requirement (still applicable) that the doctor
should state a cause of death which was true to the best of his knowledge and belief.
(f) A doctor who had attended the deceased in life, or was called to attend and found
him/her dead, should, if unable to certify the cause of death, report the fact of death
to the coroner. In 1971 (as now), there was no statutory duty on a doctor to make a
report to the coroner in circumstances where a death was reportable. The effect of
the Committee’s recommendations would have been to impose such a duty.
(g) The doctor should follow up a report to the coroner by sending to him the certificate
of fact and cause of death, containing as much information about the death as the
doctor was able to provide.
(h) A new certificate of the fact and cause of death should be introduced, incorporating
a number of changes.
I observe that, even if these changes had been implemented, the system of death
certification would still have been dependent upon the integrity of a single doctor.
3.80 The Committee was satisfied that the changes in the procedures for the certification of the
medical cause of death would achieve a significantly higher degree of certainty that the
cause of death had been accurately established before registration of the death than had
previously been the case. Thus, the changes would provide an adequate safeguard, even
in a death followed by cremation, where the body would not be available for further
examination in the future. The Committee urged that all the recommendations which it had
made should be implemented at the same time and as soon as possible. The Report went
on to say this:
‘But if,for any reason,there is a likelihood that the changes may be
deferred for a considerable period,we recommend that Form C ... should
be abolished without delay. We have already indicated that [sic] the
81
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
reasons why we consider that this certificate may be abolished with
complete safety and we believe that the existing Regulations (minus the
reference to this certificate) can adequately protect the public interest
until the introduction of the changes [i.e. the changes to the certification of
the medical cause of death] which we have recommended in Part I.’
3.81 The Report of the Brodrick Committee was presented to Parliament in November 1971.
The Period from 1971 to 1977
3.82 The reference in the Brodrick Report to the possibility that implementation of the
recommendations relating to certification of the medical cause of death might be deferred
for a considerable period proved prophetic. Despite the passage of over 30 years since
publication of the Report, the systems of death and cremation certification remain virtually
unchanged today. It is necessary to examine the subsequent history in order to
understand why the recommendations contained in the Report never became law.
Examination of the history may also help those who have to consider the implementation
of the reforms that will be proposed in this Report and those that appear in the Report of
the Coroners Review. The history demonstrates that there are competing interests that
may never be reconciled. Progress towards implementation may depend upon a
willingness to take a definite policy decision, regardless of objection from some quarters.
3.83 The first issue to be decided within Government was how to take forward the
recommendations. They fell into two groups. The first group comprised those matters
relating to medical certification of the fact and cause of death (or ‘medical certification’);
those were the province of the General Register Office (GRO). The second group
consisted of topics that were within the responsibility of the Home Office, namely those
relating to cremation procedures and coroners. The GRO, which fell within the remit of the
then Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS), intended to implement the
recommendations relating to medical certification by effecting amendments to the
legislation governing the registration of births and deaths.
3.84 In June 1972, it was decided that the best way of dismantling the cremation certification
system was to repeal section 7 of the Cremation Act 1902, which required the Home
Secretary to prescribe the form of certificates to be given before cremation could take
place. The existing Regulations could then also be repealed. It was suggested that a
suitable clause might be inserted into the Bill by which the GRO intended to effect the
amendments relating to medical certification. It was hoped that the Home Secretary would
support the inclusion of the Bill in the Parliamentary legislative programme. The intention
was to get a paper to the Home and Social Affairs Committee by the autumn and seek the
Committee’s authority to proceed.
3.85 The GRO prepared draft recommendations for changes to the registration legislation but
the Home Office timetable slipped. It was not until August 1973 that the Home Office
circulated a draft memorandum on the recommendations contained in the Brodrick
Report.
3.86 Circulation of the memorandum provoked a response from the DPP, who was opposed to
abolition of the existing cremation certification procedures without some alternative
82
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
safeguard. He had suggested that, if the cremation certification procedure were to be
abolished, there should be a new type of confirmatory certificate in cases where a
cremation was to take place. GRO and Home Office officials took the view that there was
no reason to suppose that any proposed system for a second certificate would be
effective in preventing the concealment of homicide.
3.87 In late May or early June 1974, a meeting took place between the DPP and officials from
the Home Office and the GRO. At that meeting, there was discussion about the value of
the various procedures carried out by the Form C doctor. In a subsequent memorandum,
written by Mr Stotesbury (the Home Office representative at the meeting), he recorded
that, at the meeting, the DPP had asserted that an important feature of the Form C
procedure was that the second doctor could find out about the circumstances
surrounding the death by questioning the Form B doctor, nursing staff and relatives.
Mr Stotesbury pointed out that Form C allowed the second doctor to do this, but did not
compel him to do so. He was sceptical about the value of questioning the Form B doctor
and observed that a requirement that a third person must be questioned in every case
would be ‘a monstrous interference of [sic] privacy which Parliament would reject’.
In a letter to the DHSS, Mr Stotesbury observed that the requirement would add to the
distress of relatives and might perhaps lead to further increase in the fees charged by
Form C doctors. In the light of the recommendations made by the Brodrick Committee,
Mr Stotesbury did not believe that insistence on the questioning of a third person (other
than the Form B doctor) was politically viable. In response to that letter, Mr Yellowlees,
then Chief Medical Officer, agreed with Mr Stotesbury’s observations and expressed the
additional concern that the questioning would take up a considerable amount of the Form
C doctor’s time and was likely to be considered by most doctors ‘a wearisome formality’.
His view was that the questioning was likely to be conducted as perfunctorily (and,
consequently, be as valueless) as the physical examination of the deceased carried out
by the Form C doctor. The correspondence between Mr Stotesbury and Mr Yellowlees
was shown to the DPP, who said that his views had been misunderstood. He had not
suggested that it should be a requirement that the Form C doctor should make enquiries
of the deceased’s relatives or another third person. In a letter to the Home Office, he
observed, ‘The occasions when he [the Form C doctor] found it necessary himself to
question relatives etc would,I should expect,be comparatively infrequent.’
However, he adhered to his previous view that, in cases of cremation, there should be a
confirmatory certificate from a second doctor. The Hon Dr Shirley Summerskill MP,
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Home Office (herself a former general
practitioner), shared the DPP’s view. Efforts were therefore made to find a solution
acceptable to all.
3.88 In May 1975, after discussions with the DHSS, the Home Office proposed that, for deaths
occurring outside hospital only, a second medical certificate should be provided. The
certificate would be given by a doctor who would see the MCCD, view the body and certify
that he saw no reason to disagree with the medical cause of death as stated on the MCCD.
The second doctor would be a member of a panel of experienced doctors, appointed for
the purpose by the cremation authority. The DPP signified his agreement to that proposal.
Doubts about the proposal were, however, raised by officials in the Scottish Home and
83
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Health Department. They pointed out that the Crown Agent (the Scottish equivalent of the
DPP) took the view that the confirmatory cremation certificate was needed just as much
for hospital deaths as for deaths in the community. A query was also raised as to who,
following the abolition of the post of medical referee, would be responsible for scrutinising
the new type of confirmatory certificate.
3.89 In August 1975, The Rt Hon Mr Roy Jenkins MP (later Lord Jenkins of Hillhead), then Home
Secretary, announced, by way of written answer to an arranged Parliamentary question,
that the Government accepted the Brodrick Committee’s recommendations for a new
system for medical certification and the abolition of the existing cremation procedures. He
signified the Government’s intention to introduce a confirmatory certificate as agreed with
the DPP. He also made clear that most of the recommendations of the Brodrick Committee
in relation to coroners were accepted. He indicated that the Government proposed to
open discussions with various interested organisations and to consider what procedural
reforms might be achieved, in advance of legislation, through the use of existing
statutory powers.
3.90 The Home Office decided to deal first with the recommendations relating to coroners. To
this end, a Working Party was set up and held its first meeting in January 1977. Its
deliberations dealt only with coronial matters and did not extend to cremation certification.
No progress was made on that aspect of the Brodrick recommendations.
The Period from 1978 to 1988
3.91 In August 1978, a meeting took place between officials of the Home Office and the GRO to
discuss the introduction of legislation to implement the recommendations of the Brodrick
Committee. A new DPP was then in post and Home Office officials intended to discover
whether he would reconsider the requirement, insisted on by his predecessor, for a
confirmatory medical certificate for cremations following deaths in the community. In
October 1978, The Rt Hon Mr Merlyn Rees MP (later Lord Merlyn-Rees), then Home
Secretary, in a written answer to a Parliamentary question, said that discussions
subsequent to his predecessor’s (i.e. Mr Jenkins’) written answer, given more than three
years previously, had revealed widely divergent views about the proposal for the new
confirmatory certificate. He was considering whether any alternative arrangements could
be suggested which might meet with more general approval.
3.92 By December 1978, it had been agreed that the recommendations relating to medical
certification of the fact and cause of death should be progressed, with a view to
presentation of a Bill in the 1979/80 Parliamentary session. Home Office officials
suggested that the GRO should take the lead in relation to the proposed Bill, although the
Home Office would assist as necessary on matters relating to cremation certification and
coroners’ functions. In the event, the GRO failed to secure Parliamentary time for its Bill.
3.93 In March 1979, the Home Office received notification that the DPP took the same view as
his predecessor, namely that there should be a confirmatory certificate in cremation cases
following deaths occurring in the community. It seemed, therefore, that there was going
to be no easy way to carry forward the Brodrick Committee’s proposal to abolish the
84
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
cremation certification procedure. In August 1979, a Committee (known as the ‘Ad Hoc
Committee’), representing the cremation organisations and the National Association of
Funeral Directors, had a meeting with Home Office officials. The Ad Hoc Committee
wanted the Home Office to implement, without further delay, the Brodrick Committee’s
recommendation that Form C be abolished. Members of the Ad Hoc Committee claimed
that the costs associated with cremation were excessive and unacceptable and that, as
a consequence, the rate of increase in the number of cremations was slowing down. They
were perturbed to hear that the recommendation for abolition might not be implemented
at all because of the DPP’s objections. They had believed, following Mr Jenkins’
Parliamentary answer in 1975, that the Government was committed to abolition.
3.94 Following the meeting, the Ad Hoc Committee lobbied members of the House of
Commons and the House of Lords, pressing for a change in the law. The Committee also
put forward a simpler and less expensive alternative to the existing cremation certification
system. These steps led to a further meeting, in March 1981, attended by Mr Timothy
Raison MP (later The Rt Hon Sir Timothy Raison), then Minister of State at the Home Office,
Sir George Young MP (later The Rt Hon Sir George Young), then Mr Raison’s opposite
number at the DHSS, the Deputy DPP, representatives from the BMA, the Association of
Chief Police Officers (ACPO), the GRO and members of the Ad Hoc Committee, together
with various departmental officials. The meeting produced general agreement that the
system of death certification should be improved. However, the division of opinion about
the value of the certification system in general, and Form C in particular, remained. The
representatives of the BMA and ACPO took the view that the system provided a valuable
deterrent and should be retained in all cases. The Deputy DPP argued for its retention for
deaths occurring outside hospital. The DHSS supported abolition of Form C, but wanted
a requirement that Form B should be completed by a doctor of not less than five years’
standing. The GRO stressed the need for medical certification to be strengthened, in
accordance with the Brodrick Committee’s recommendations, before any changes to the
cremation certification system were made. There was little support for the alternative
system which had been put forward by the Ad Hoc Committee. At the conclusion of the
meeting, no agreement had been reached. Mr Raison suggested that Home Office
officials should consider further the proposal that Form C should be dispensed with for
deaths occurring in hospital.
3.95 In early 1981, a Private Member’s Bill (later the Industrial Diseases (Notification) Act 1981)
was introduced. The Bill sought to place a statutory requirement on doctors to report to the
coroner deaths that might have been caused or contributed to by the deceased’s former
employment. This Bill was introduced by Mr Nigel Spearing MP and eventually resulted in
the addition of the ‘Spearing box’ to the MCCD. The certifying doctor was to tick this box
if he had any reason to believe that the death was or might have been caused by the
employment followed at any time by the deceased. During the course of the Bill’s passage
through Parliament, there was general agreement among those involved that the Brodrick
Committee’s recommendations relating to medical certification of the fact and cause of
death should be implemented without delay. In its final form, the 1981 Act enabled the
Registrar General to make Regulations concerning the notification and certification of
death and for the recording of the information relating to industrial diseases and matters
related thereto.
85
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
3.96 Later that year, Mr Raison wrote to Mr Geoffrey Finsberg MP (later Lord Finsberg of
Hampstead), then Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the DHSS, to enquire whether
there was any prospect of a Bill being brought forward to implement the Brodrick
Committee’s recommendations. Mr Raison observed that the Home Office was
particularly anxious to see the recommendations implemented since it was hoped that this
would pave the way for abolition of cremation Forms B and C.
3.97 In November 1981, it became evident that the GRO Medical Advisory Committee
disagreed with some of the Brodrick Committee’s recommendations about medical
certification of the fact and cause of death. In particular, the Medical Advisory Committee
could see nothing to be gained by reducing the period within which the certifying doctor
must have seen the deceased from 14 to 7 days preceding death. In addition, the
Committee found the requirement that a certifying doctor should state the cause of death
‘with accuracy and precision’ totally unacceptable. There were serious doubts, the
Committee said, as to whether the requirement would be accepted by the medical
profession as a whole.
3.98 On 10th November 1981, Mr Finsberg wrote to Mr Raison, informing him that the DHSS
intended to ask the Registrar General to consult the medical profession on revised
proposals, which reflected the views of the Medical Advisory Committee. The revised
proposals omitted the provision that doctors should certify the cause of death ‘with
accuracy and precision’. This suggestion caused dismay at the Home Office.
Mr Raison wrote a letter in reply, pointing out that the effect of demanding ‘accuracy
and precision’ on the part of certifying doctors would, according to the Brodrick
Committee, be to improve the accuracy of death certification. That would be a laudable
aim in itself. In addition, if the terms of the declaration on the MCCD were to remain
unchanged, as the DHSS was proposing, this would make it much more difficult to press
ahead with abolition of the cremation certification procedures in the future. He urged
that, rather than conceding the point at this stage, there should be consultation on the
declaration, as on other aspects of the Brodrick Committee’s recommendations. In a
letter dated 16th December 1981, Mr Finsberg agreed to ask the Registrar General to
include the issue within the package of consultations to be undertaken. He drew
attention to the concern within the GRO that there were many doctors who, if required
to certify the cause of death ‘with accuracy and precision’, might refuse to sign the
certificate at all. If that happened in too many cases, he said, the system would be
‘wrecked’.
3.99 During 1982, the GRO and the Home Office carried out a consultation exercise in
connection with the proposals. The GRO dealt with the medical profession and the Home
Office consulted with the Coroners’ Society and local authority associations. The medical
profession took the same view as the GRO Medical Advisory Committee about the two
issues to which I have referred, i.e. the period of time before death within which the
certifying doctor should have seen the deceased and the terms of the declaration on the
new MCCD. By December 1982, Home Office officials, like the GRO and the DHSS, had
apparently accepted that those two recommendations of the Brodrick Committee would
have to be abandoned. Those recommendations had, of course, formed an important part
86
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
of the Brodrick Committee’s plans to strengthen the system of medical certification. The
major recommendations still remaining were as follows:
(a) The certifying doctor should be fully registered.
(b) The certifying doctor should inspect the body before completing the new MCCD.
(c) The attending doctor should either certify the cause of death or report the case to
the coroner.
(d) There should be a statutory requirement on the doctor to report a death to the
coroner in an appropriate case.
It was decided to proceed with a Bill containing those provisions.
3.100 At about this time, two further areas of dissent emerged. The BMA objected to the proposal
that only fully registered doctors should be entitled to complete the new MCCD.
Representatives of the BMA contended that doctors with provisional and limited
registration working in hospital should be permitted to certify, provided that the name of
the consultant in charge of the deceased’s care appeared on the MCCD. Furthermore, the
BMA contended that there should be no requirement that a certifying doctor should have
seen the deceased’s body after death, provided that he had seen the deceased within the
14 days preceding death and provided also that a second doctor, who had shared the
care of the deceased in life, had inspected the body after death and the two doctors had
discussed and agreed upon the cause of death. This was a wholly new proposal, which
would have catered for the situation where it was inconvenient or impossible for the
attending doctor to view the body after death.
3.101 In March 1983, the then Registrar General expressed some concern that, if all the BMA’s
proposals were accepted, the new system would fall far short of the recommendations of
the Brodrick Committee and might, as a result, be the subject of criticism. Despite those
concerns, work on the proposed legislation continued on the basis of the BMA’s
proposals. Parliamentary time for the Bill was provisionally granted for the October 1983
session and preparations were made to instruct Parliamentary Counsel to draft the
necessary Bill. However, a general election intervened.
3.102 Following the general election, tension arose between the DHSS and the Home Office in
relation to implementation of the Brodrick Committee’s recommendations. Mr David
Mellor MP (later The Rt Hon David Mellor), then Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at
the Home Office, was concerned about what he termed the ‘scandal’ of the charges levied
by doctors for completing cremation Forms B and C. By that time, the combined cost of
the two forms exceeded the death grant payable to a bereaved family. Mr Mellor wanted
to see the cremation procedure simplified by the removal of the requirement for Form C.
He saw the proposed changes to the medical certification of the fact and cause of death
as a lever which could be used in future negotiations to simplify the arrangements for
cremation certification.
3.103 Meanwhile, Mr John Patten MP (later Lord Patten of Wincanton), then Parliamentary Under
Secretary of State at the DHSS, had decided to abandon the Bill which had previously
been planned. Even after the concessions that had been made in relation to the original
87
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Brodrick recommendations, there was outstanding disagreement between the GRO and
the medical profession about the detail of the proposed new system. There was concern
that doctors might demand a fee for completing the newly designed MCCD, which would
have considerable financial implications for the DHSS. It appears that there was not the
political will to impose the Brodrick proposals, even as diluted by the agreed concessions.
Mr Patten decided that, instead of proceeding with the Bill, his Department’s efforts should
be directed at effecting amendments to the existing MCCD by adding the ‘Spearing box’,
together with a requirement that, for a hospital death, the consultant responsible for the
deceased’s care should be identified. Those changes did not require legislation and a
new form of MCCD was introduced the following year.
3.104 In June 1984, Mr Patten and Mr Mellor met. Mr Patten indicated that there was no
immediate question of a change in his decision to abandon the Bill. The future of the
cremation procedures was discussed. It became clear that the DHSS was reluctant to
enter into a battle with the BMA over the issues of certificates and fees. It was therefore
agreed that the Home Office would initiate discussions with the BMA. Mr Mellor indicated
his intention to take a ‘tough approach’ to the negotiations.
3.105 A meeting between Mr Mellor, Home Office officials and representatives of the BMA took
place in October 1984. At the meeting, the BMA maintained their previous stance that the
involvement of the second doctor and the medical referee constituted important
safeguards for the public. The BMA made the point that any change to the cremation
procedures would have to be in the context of a complete revision of the medical
certification system. The BMA prevailed and no step was taken to abolish Form C.
3.106 In 1985, the Regulations governing cremation were amended. The Cremation
(Amendment) Regulations 1985 provided that, where a deceased was a hospital inpatient
at the time of his/her death, and where a post-mortem examination had been
carried out and the results were known to the attending doctor before he completed Form
B, no confirmatory Form C would be required. A new question (8A) was added to the
prescribed Form B. The question did not require the certifying doctor to state the result of
the post-mortem examination. The intention was to reduce the number of cases in which
a Form C would be required and thus to reduce the cost to the public.
3.107 The Regulations ran into difficulties. In order for the new provision to apply, the doctor
carrying out the post-mortem examination had to be a registered medical practitioner of
at least five years’ standing. Many hospital post-mortems were performed by trainees,
who did not fulfil that requirement. It soon became apparent that some doctors were taking
no steps to inform themselves of the results of any post-mortem examination carried out
before completing Form B. Thus, Forms C were being completed where there was in fact
no need for a confirmatory certificate. Even when the Form B doctor had indicated on Form
B that he was aware of the results of a post-mortem examination, Form C was often
completed. As a consequence of these problems, the number of Forms C provided was
not reduced to the extent that had been hoped.
3.108 In February 1985, Mr Johnson, an official at the Home Office, wrote to all medical referees.
The Home Office had conducted a survey of the work of medical referees during the 12
months ending 31st March 1984. Completed questionnaires had been received from 186
88
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
crematoria, which had carried out a total of 360,842 cremations during the relevant period.
Of these, 273,335 cremations had been authorised by the medical referee following
receipt of Forms B and C; the remainder had been authorised following receipt of a
coroner’s Form E.
3.109 Medical referees were asked how frequently they had raised queries with the doctors
completing Forms B and C. The results of the survey revealed widely differing practices.
One medical referee reported that he had raised 7136 separate queries in connection with
2914 cremations. Another had authorised 701 cremations and raised no questions at all.
Out of the 273,335 cremations authorised on the basis of Forms B and C, 1701 queries
had been raised in connection with the cause of death. On 182 occasions, enquiries
initiated by medical referees had resulted in the cause of death being changed. Medical
referees had ordered autopsies in 93 cases and had reported 367 deaths to the coroner.
3.110 Many medical referees were critical of the poor standard of completion of Forms B and C.
The majority view was that Form C served little useful purpose. Errors in Form B often went
uncorrected by the Form C doctor and Form C still appeared to be merely a statement of
confidence by one doctor in another. By way of an alternative system, medical referees
favoured abolition of Form C, the introduction of a more detailed Form B and personal
enquiry by the medical referee.
3.111 During 1987 and 1988, there were discussions between the Home Office, the DPP and the
Solicitor-General about possible abolition of cremation Form C. Mr Douglas Hogg MP,
who was by that time Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Home Office, was keen
to abolish Form C. The discussions foundered since both the Law Officers were prepared
to countenance abolition only if it were accompanied by an improved medical certificate
of the fact and cause of death or by additional safeguards which were judged by the Home
Office to be unworkable. The DHSS was also opposed to abolition of Form C in the
absence of improved medical certification. The BMA remained implacably opposed to
abolition. In November 1988, the Home Office took the decision to abandon its attempts
to abolish Form C until the GRO had effected changes to the procedure for certification of
the medical cause of death. However, that decision was not accompanied by any attempt
to strengthen the Form C procedure, so as to ensure that it served the purpose for which
it was originally intended, namely the exposure of concealed homicide. Despite the
stance taken by the Law Officers, the Home Office continued to accept the view of the
Brodrick Committee that the risk of concealed homicide was minimal.
3.112 In December 1988, the Department of Health (DoH) published a Green Paper,
‘Registration: a Modern Service’, dealing with reform of the registration service. The Green
Paper included proposals that:
- A statutory duty should be placed on doctors to report to the coroner all
unnatural deaths.
- The right to issue a medical certificate of the fact and cause of death should be
restricted to a medical practitioner who had seen the deceased at least once
during the 14 days preceding death and who had inspected the body after death.
89
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
3.113 The total effect of the changes proposed was very much more limited than that which
would have resulted from implementation of the entire package of recommendations
contained in the Brodrick Report.
The Draft Cremation Regulations of 1989
3.114 Draft Cremation Regulations were circulated for consultation in June 1989. These had
been under consideration for some time. Mr Robert Clifford, Head of the Coroners Section
of the Animal Procedures and Coroners Unit (formerly the Animals, Byelaws and Coroners
Unit) of the Home Office since 1995, gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. He said that he
understood that Home Office lawyers had been advising for several years that the
Cremation Regulations, which had been amended on several occasions since 1930,
should be consolidated and revised. The proposed Regulations, as drafted, were mainly
consolidating in nature, although they did contain some changes of procedure. The draft
Regulations included a requirement that the Form C doctor must not have been
concerned with the case or the treatment of the deceased during his/her last illness. A
revised version of Form C was proposed. This required the certifying doctor to state (in
response to questions 1, 2 and 4(a)) whether he had seen the deceased’s body, made a
careful examination of it and questioned the Form B doctor and, if not, why not. A note to
the proposed Form C stated:
‘For a cremation to be authorised without further enquiry,questions 1,2
and 4(a) must be answered in the affirmative.’
3.115 By Schedule 3 to the draft Regulations, where Form C had been completed, the medical
referee, before giving authority to cremate, was obliged to satisfy himself that the answers
to questions 1, 2 and 4(a) were in the affirmative or, if not, that there were satisfactory
reasons why not. This provision, if implemented, would have given regulatory force to a
requirement that existed at all, or virtually all, crematoria in the land. The draft Regulations
contained no similar provision in relation to enquiries to be made of persons other than the
Form B doctor, nor did the doctor completing Form C have to state why no such enquiries
had been made.
3.116 The exercise of consulting on the draft Regulations raised the familiar arguments about
the need to abolish the procedures for cremation certification, together with other specific
objections to the proposals. No progress was made and the draft Regulations were never
implemented.
The Period from 1990 to the Present
3.117 The 1988 Green Paper was followed by a White Paper, ‘Registration: proposals for
change’, which was published by the DoH in January 1990. This White Paper repeated
the two significant proposed changes to the system of medical certification that had been
contained within the Green Paper. However, following publication of the White Paper,
attempts to secure Parliamentary time for a Bill were unsuccessful and other events
intervened, with the result that the amendments to legislation proposed in the White Paper
never reached the statute book.
90
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
3.118 In 1993, spurred on by yet further pressure from the cremation organisations, the Home
Office initiated another series of consultations in an attempt to obtain agreement to the
abolition of Form C. Those consultations did not include the BMA, whose stance was by
that time well known. Despite that omission, no clear consensus was reached and the
matter was not pursued.
3.119 Throughout the mid-1990s, it remained an objective of the Home Office to effect
amendments to the Cremation Regulations. Legal advice, by then well over a decade old,
had been to the effect that the existing Regulations required consolidation and
amendment. Overhaul of the Regulations would give the opportunity to up-date
procedures and, it was hoped, might result in the abolition of Form C. In 1996, Home Office
officials discussed the possibility of approaching Ministers to seek agreement for another
consultation exercise. Mr Clifford told the Inquiry that the proposal never reached
Ministers, as the Department could not afford the expenditure of the time and effort
required to mount another major consultation exercise. In any event, it must have been
recognised that such an exercise was unlikely to produce any consensus. If significant
change were to have been effected, it would have required the political will to override the
views of those who dissented from the Government proposals.
3.120 In November 1997, the Home Office became aware of a survey that had been carried out
by the Home and Health Department of the Scottish Office three years earlier. The
Department had inspected 24 sets of cremation forms submitted to each crematorium in
Scotland during a calendar year. The forms were chosen at random by means of
cremation numbers submitted by the crematoria in their annual returns to the Federation
of British Cremation Authorities. The survey revealed many defects in the way the forms
had been completed. This in turn gave rise to concern that the medical referees had,
despite those defects, passed the forms and authorised cremation. Examples of the
matters which gave rise to concern were:
(a) Forms B and C were in some cases signed by doctors who worked in close
proximity to each other and could not be said to be truly independent.
(b) Some deaths which should have been reported to the procurator fiscal (the
Scottish equivalent of the coroner) had not been.
(c) Questions in Form B were frequently left unanswered or misinterpreted.
(d) Forms C had not always been submitted when the Regulations required it.
Conversely, in other cases (where there had been a hospital autopsy and the Form
B doctor was aware of the results) Forms C were submitted (and presumably
charged for) where there was no requirement.
(e) In some cases, none of questions 2–5 of Form C (the equivalent of questions 5–8
on the English version) had been answered in the affirmative.
3.121 In September 1995, following the survey, a letter was written to all medical referees and
deputies in Scotland, drawing their attention to the concerns arising from the survey. The
letter reminded referees that at least one of questions 2–5 should be answered in the
affirmative unless the form was completed by a pathologist who had completed an
91
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
autopsy. At the conclusion of the letter, referees were reminded that they were ‘the last
line of defence against the possibility of suspicious circumstances’ and that they
should ensure that no cremation took place unless the forms had been properly
completed. The letter was later reproduced in a Health Bulletin circulated to all doctors in
Scotland.
3.122 The Home Office recognised that a similar problem of poor completion of cremation forms
might well exist in England and Wales. Consideration was therefore given to the possibility
of carrying out a similar survey and, indeed, preliminary steps were taken to explore the
possibility of funding for such a survey, to be carried out with the assistance of the DoH
and the Office for National Statistics (ONS). No funding was then available. The survey
project continued to be discussed but was overtaken by events. Mr Clifford told the Inquiry
that the Home Office wished to clarify whether the existing procedures were being
properly observed and, if not, whether the failure to observe them was having an adverse
effect. It was not clear how it was intended that the presence or absence of such an effect
was to be assessed. As matters turned out, however, the necessary evidence was indeed
forthcoming. It was provided by Shipman.
3.123 In September 1998, Shipman was arrested and, in 1999, the Home Office became aware
of the fact that many of his probable victims had been cremated. Immediately following
Shipman’s conviction, a Home Office official wrote to all medical referees, reminding
them, in the light of the Shipman case, to be vigilant at all times. Referees were also
reminded of their power to make their own enquiries and to refer cases to the coroner for
further investigation.
3.124 In 2000, the Cremation (Amendment) Regulations were introduced in order to enable
separated body parts to be cremated where the remainder of the body had previously
been buried. This followed the discovery that a large quantity of organs and tissues
removed during autopsies had been retained at the Bristol Royal Infirmary and the Royal
Liverpool Children’s NHS Trust (Alder Hey Children’s Hospital). Organs and tissues were
returned to the parents of the dead children concerned and arrangements for burial and
cremation were necessary.
3.125 Meanwhile, shortly after Shipman’s conviction in January 2000, the Home Office set up a
Review into Death Certification. Under its Terms of Reference, the Review was to consider,
among other things, improvements to the provisions for authorising cremation. The Review
issued a Consultation Paper in July 2000 and reported finally in September 2001. I have
taken account of its thought-provoking recommendations.
3.126 In February 2001, this Inquiry was set up, with Terms of Reference which include
consideration of the ways in which the existing arrangements for death and cremation
certification should be changed in order to provide improved protection of patients. In the
summer of 2001, the Home Office set up the Coroners Review, to which I have already
referred. The Coroners Review was given wide-ranging Terms of Reference, covering all
aspects of arrangements for death investigation and certification. I shall refer to the
recommendations of the Coroners Review in Chapter Nineteen.
3.127 In early 2003, after Mr Clifford had given oral evidence to the Inquiry, Home Office officials
met representatives of the cremation organisations and medical referees to discuss ways
92
SHIP03$$15 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
in which cremation procedures might be improved in the short term, pending any changes
to the law consequent upon the recommendations of this Inquiry and the Coroners
Review. The Inquiry has been told that, following that meeting, a number of measures have
been proposed. The Home Office is considering giving advice to cremation authorities,
relating to the selection of nominees for the post of medical referee. Induction and
guidance material is to be prepared and provided to medical referees. There are
proposals for joint seminars between medical referees and coroners. In addition, the
Home Office intends to explore the possibility of introducing a general requirement that
Form C doctors should question a person other than the Form B doctor before signing the
confirmatory certificate. I shall refer to this topic at greater length in Chapter Eleven.
3.128 At present, however, despite attempts over the years to effect change, the system of
cremation certification remains more or less the same as when it was first introduced a
century ago. In Chapter Eleven, I shall discuss how the system works in practice and my
recommendations for the future.
93
SHIP03P003 25-06-03 11:44:26 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: BLANK ProofRound: 2
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER FOUR
The Functions of the Police, Ambulance Services, General
Practitioners and Deputising Doctors in the Immediate
Aftermath of a Death in the Community
Introduction
4.1 When a death occurs in a hospital, hospice or care home, there are professionals on hand
who know what action to take. However, when a death occurs at home, the relatives,
friends or carers of the deceased often do not know what to do or what is expected of them
as their legal duty. Often, their first concern is to know whether or not death has in fact
occurred. There is no single agency or authority with primary responsibility for responding
to the occurrence of a death. The ambulance service might be summoned if it is thought
that the deceased might not be beyond resuscitation. The police might be called,
especially when the death has occurred suddenly. In other cases, relatives might contact
the deceased’s general practitioner and, depending on the circumstances and time of
day, either the general practitioner or a doctor from a deputising service might attend.
4.2 The legal position is that there is no general obligation to report a death to the police. Of
course, if it appears that the death was due to a criminal act or resulted from a road traffic
accident or an accident at work, the police will be summoned. Nor is there any legal
requirement that a doctor should confirm the fact that life is extinct. If a medical practitioner
is willing and able to issue an MCCD, the relatives can register the death and arrange for
the disposal of the body. If there is no medical practitioner willing and able to issue an
MCCD, the death must be reported to the coroner.
4.3 Because the reactions of the bereaved to the death cannot be predicted or controlled, the
public services and medical profession recognise that there must be a degree of flexibility
in the ways in which they respond to calls from the families of the recently deceased. In
this Chapter, I shall examine the functions of the medical and emergency services in the
immediate aftermath of a death in the community. I have chosen to deal with the
ambulance service first, then the police and, finally, the general practitioners and
deputising services. However, it must be recognised that there are many occasions on
which neither the police nor the ambulance service is called. There are also some deaths
in which the police, the ambulance service and a doctor are all involved.
The Role of the Ambulance Service
The Greater Manchester Ambulance Service
4.4 The Inquiry’s investigations into the role of the ambulance service have focussed mainly
on the work of the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service NHS Trust (GMAS). This is
because the area of Hyde is covered by GMAS.
4.5 Although precise figures are unavailable, it seems that between 1% and 2% of all calls
received by GMAS relate to patients who are dead at the time of arrival of the ambulance.
95
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
When called to attend a patient who appears to be dead, the GMAS crew will first
determine whether resuscitation is possible, using criteria laid down in an established
protocol. They will enquire of those present as to the circumstances of the collapse or
discovery of the body. If they decide that resuscitation might be possible, the appropriate
resuscitation procedures will be commenced and the patient will be taken to the nearest
hospital with an accident and emergency department. If, however, in cases where the
protocol applies, the paramedics confirm that the patient is dead, they do not take the
body to hospital. They will ask Ambulance Control to contact the police if there is any
suspicion of criminal involvement in the death. If there is not, Ambulance Control will
attempt to contact the deceased’s general practitioner to ascertain whether or not s/he is
willing and able to issue an MCCD. If the general practitioner is willing and able to do so,
the ambulance crew will complete their documentation and, after ensuring that the
relatives present are able to cope with their difficult situation, they will leave. If the general
practitioner cannot be traced or will not attend, arrangements will be made for Ambulance
Control to contact the police.
4.6 Prior to 1993, ambulance personnel in Greater Manchester were not authorised to confirm
that a patient was dead. When they believed that the patient had died, they had to summon
a doctor to confirm that death had occurred. Whenever there was a delay in the arrival of
the doctor (whether general practitioner or deputising doctor), the practice was for the
deceased’s body to be transferred by ambulance to the local hospital for confirmation of
death and then to the hospital mortuary for formal identification procedures to be
performed. This was recognised to be wasteful of resources and unnecessarily
distressing for the bereaved family. Following a successful pilot scheme set up in 1992, a
protocol covering the Greater Manchester area came into force in 1993. This protocol,
which remains in force subject to minor changes, provides essentially that, when
ambulance personnel are satisfied that an adult (but not a child) has died on private
premises (as opposed to in a public place), they should call out the deceased’s general
practitioner or, if s/he is unavailable, the police. They are then free to carry on with their
other duties. It is left to the discretion of the attending ambulance personnel whether or not
they leave the scene before the police or doctor arrive. The ambulance crew are
encouraged to depart the scene only if satisfied that the needs of the family do not require
them to remain. In practice, the crew often remain at the scene until the arrival of the police
or general practitioner.
4.7 This protocol appears to have worked well. I was impressed by the evidence of the
ambulance personnel who came to the Inquiry. They appeared to know what to do and
how to do it. They seemed able to provide a degree of sympathetic reassurance to the
family of the deceased. They also appeared to me to complete their paperwork, on which
their decisions and actions are recorded, to a high standard.
4.8 There have been discussions between GMAS and Greater Manchester Police (GMP)
about the circumstances in which ambulance personnel might be required to remain at
the scene of a death if there are potentially suspicious circumstances. Difficulties have
arisen in defining such circumstances and in determining the period for which ambulance
personnel should be required to await the arrival of the police. Such discussions have
been suspended and await any recommendations of this Inquiry.
96
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Ambulance Services in Other Areas
4.9 Although many ambulance trusts have adopted policies that permit the ambulance crew
to confirm that death has occurred and to leave the scene when a delay in the attendance
of a doctor or the police is anticipated, this is not the universal position. National training
manuals provide that, where delay in the attendance of a doctor is likely in the case of a
death at home, the deceased should be removed ‘directly to hospital’. Of 14 other
ambulance trusts canvassed by the Inquiry, most – but not all – have a policy similar to
that of GMAS. It follows, therefore, that, in some areas, where there is delay in awaiting the
attendance of a doctor, the ambulance crew have to remain at the scene and, in some
cases, they convey the body to hospital for the fact of death to be confirmed.
4.10 As I shall explain later in this Chapter, in some areas where paramedics have a protocol
which allows them to confirm the fact of death in an adult, the ambulance service is, on
occasions, called out specifically for that purpose. I shall consider later whether or not this
is an appropriate use of its resources.
Police Attendance at the Scene of a Death
4.11 The Inquiry learned that policies relating to the attendance of the police at the scene of a
death vary from area to area. Because of its involvement in the investigation of Shipman,
the procedures of the GMP have been closely scrutinised. In some respects I shall be
critical of their procedures and practices. I must stress that I do not think that the problems
I shall outline exist only in the GMP; indeed it appears to me that they are probably
widespread.
Initiation of a Report
4.12 Reports of death are usually made to the GMP by telephone. They are received by an
operator in the Area Operations Rooms (AOR), who opens a computerised log, in which
the progress of police involvement is recorded. Uniformed patrol officers are sent to the
scene.
4.13 Many deaths are reported to the GMP, not because the person reporting believes that the
circumstances of the death in question are suspicious of criminal involvement, but for
other reasons. Detective Chief Superintendent (DCS) Peter Stelfox, GMP Head of Crime
Investigation, said that these reasons include a misguided belief that there is an obligation
to report. There is sometimes a request for assistance in gaining entry to premises, where
there is concern for the occupant’s welfare. On arrival, the police may find the occupant
dead. Other examples involve requests for assistance in tracing next of kin and other
relatives. The police have a valuable part to play in such cases. Sometimes, the police are
asked for advice where people just do not know what to do. The police are called on in
their general ‘public service’ role. In many such cases, the person finding the body could
have chosen to contact the deceased’s general practitioner or the ambulance service
instead and, had they done so, it is quite likely that the police would never have known of
the death because the general practitioner would have issued an MCCD.
97
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
4.14 On arrival, the police officers will seek to ascertain whether the person is in fact dead. If in
doubt, they will summon an ambulance. If the officers find the person dead, but establish
that no arrangements have been made for a doctor or paramedic to confirm life extinct,
they will arrange this through the AOR.
Limitation of Police Involvement if a Doctor Will Issue the Medical Certificate of Cause of
Death
4.15 Once a doctor or paramedic has been summoned to confirm the fact of death, GMP
officers’ next priority should be to assess what investigation, if any, is needed. However,
on occasions, the officers will find that a doctor has already arrived at the scene or has
promised to attend and to issue an MCCD. Once it is known that a doctor is prepared to
issue an MCCD, police involvement ceases. The police do not regard themselves as
having any further role to play, unless they remain involved for purposes such as
contacting relatives or safeguarding property and premises.
4.16 The GMP Chief Constable’s Order 98/47 and the GMP instruction manual (or blue book)
both record in terms that if ‘the deceased’s own doctor will issue a death certificate,
then our responsibility ends’. The stated reasoning underlying the policy is that a
doctor’s preparedness to issue an MCCD means (almost by definition) that the death is
natural and its cause is known. Certainly, no police officer would be expected to question
the doctor’s ability lawfully to issue. The doctor, as DCS Stelfox confirmed, ‘outranks’ the
police officer. He said that he found it difficult to imagine circumstances in which a police
officer might ask a doctor to explain his/her willingness to issue an MCCD.
4.17 DCS Stelfox was satisfied that the policy represents a perfectly logical course of action to
take, in the absence of any trigger for suspicion. However, as he said, it would be
dangerous for officers to adopt this approach as a matter of course, in circumstances
where there might be some grounds for suspicion. It appears to me that good practice
would require the attending police officer to make some brief enquiry and report as to the
circumstances, even if s/he were told that a doctor was willing to attend to certify the cause
of death.
4.18 The Inquiry obtained details of the policies and procedures of 12 police forces throughout
the UK. The information obtained suggests that the practice in Greater Manchester is
similar to that prevailing elsewhere. When the police are called out to a death and there is
no obvious suspicion of criminal activity, police involvement (or in Scotland, involvement
of the procurator fiscal) ceases as soon as it becomes known that a doctor is prepared to
issue an MCCD. In some areas, written reports of the death are submitted to the coroner
even where a doctor has certified the cause of death, but little, if any, forensic use is made
of those reports.
Where There Is or Might Be No Doctor Who Will Certify the Cause of Death
4.19 If the GMP officer either knows that the doctor will not certify the cause of death or is
uncertain of this, s/he is expected to assess the scene of the death, in order to establish
whether there are signs of violence, unlawful entry or disturbance of property. The officer
98
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
should also obtain an account of the circumstances of the death or of the discovery of the
body from anyone present.
4.20 The officer is also expected to carry out an examination of the deceased’s clothing and of
the exposed areas of the body. However, the evidence suggests that some officers are
unwilling to undertake such examinations. Detective Chief Inspector (DCI) Kenneth
Caldwell of GMP told me that attending police officers are very reluctant to touch and
examine a dead body. This reluctance sometimes results in an officer failing to observe
signs of violence that might suggest criminal involvement or at least an unnatural death.
DCI Caldwell spoke of two cases in which uniformed officers had failed to detect such
signs. In one case, obvious and unexplained injuries to the face and chest of the
deceased were overlooked and the police internal report was endorsed to the effect that
there were no visible injuries. In the second case, despite the presence of significant
burns to the chest and face, the incident log was completed on the basis that there were
no suspicious circumstances. In the event, it was found that the deceased in the first case
had died of a self-induced drug and alcohol overdose. In the second case, the deceased
had accidentally set himself on fire when smoking in bed. Either death might have been a
case of homicide, in which case the consequences of overlooking such relevant evidence
would have been very serious.
4.21 In the Northumbria police area, the attending officer is required, in all cases of sudden,
non-suspicious deaths, to perform as thorough an examination as possible at the scene
and again after the body has been stripped at the mortuary. However, this requirement
represents the exception rather than the rule. In the event that no doctor will sign an
MCCD, most forces seem only to require their officers to examine the bodies externally at
the scene for signs of injury, perhaps requiring them also to loosen or even remove
sufficient clothing to enable a thorough search for injuries to be made. In circumstances
where it has been established that a doctor will certify the cause of death, there will usually
be no examination of the body by the police. One police force advocates that only suitably
qualified medical personnel should examine the bodies of deceased persons.
4.22 In Greater Manchester, if there is any ground for suspicion of criminal involvement, a
supervising officer of the uniformed branch and an officer or officers from the Criminal
Investigations Department are called. The scene is preserved and a criminal investigation
is commenced. Some cases may initially be treated as suspicious, only for such suspicion
to be eliminated within a short time.
Police Attitudes Towards Attendance at the Scene of a Death
4.23 It was clear from the evidence that officers of the GMP do not like attending the scene of
a non-suspicious death, i.e. one that does not entail any criminal or road traffic
investigation. In his witness statement, Detective Superintendent David Jones said that
the attitude of police officers to attendance at non-suspicious deaths was influenced by
the ‘prevailing occupational culture surrounding such incidents, which created an
unstructured, inconsistent and poor quality of response’. I think this means that
officers do not think they should have to attend such deaths and that, therefore, they do
not do the work as well as they should. I also heard evidence on this topic from a small
99
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
number of GMP officers. Police Sergeant (PS) Paul Walker told me in oral evidence that
he had not liked attending such deaths when he was a junior officer because he found it
difficult to deal with the recently bereaved. Police Constable Lawrence Thurston said that,
over the years, he had become aware that many of his colleagues regarded attendance at
such deaths as a burden, particularly in cases in which it was anticipated that the general
practitioner would, in due course, issue an MCCD. I do not criticise the officers for their
attitude and, indeed, regard it as understandable, as such attendance makes little
demand on what are traditionally regarded as police skills and at the same time demands
other skills which many police officers do not possess.
The Standard of the Initial Scene Investigation
4.24 The GMP accepted that their standard of initial scene investigation of deaths in which
there is no visible evidence of violence or other obvious ground for suspicion can and
should be improved. They intend to improve training. DCS Stelfox explained that, until
now, the conclusions reached at the end of such initial investigations have been heavily
reliant on the judgements made by the uniformed officers who first attend the scene. There
has been no satisfactory audit of the appropriateness of those judgements, little
supervision of the investigations and no examination of the reports submitted.
4.25 DCS Stelfox accepted that these investigation processes required improvement.
However, he said that he was unaware of any case where there existed objective grounds
for suspicion of criminal involvement which had been missed by an officer because the
officer had instead concentrated his/her efforts on establishing whether there was a
doctor who would issue an MCCD. The Inquiry has discovered several deaths to which
the police were called but in which they did not undertake any investigation because
Shipman said that he was willing and able to issue an MCCD. In some of those cases,
Shipman had in fact killed the deceased. However, I would not expect a uniformed police
constable, trained to observe ‘conventional’ signs of criminal activity, to have noticed any
signs of suspicion in those cases. Detection of such crimes would require a completely
different approach to investigation, one that examined the deceased’s medical history
and the circumstances of the death and sought to ascertain whether they were consistent
with the cause of death suggested by the doctor. In my view, for reasons that I shall explain
later, that type of investigation should not be undertaken by police officers.
Record Keeping
4.26 In cases attended by GMP officers in which it is established that a doctor will issue an
MCCD, the only document that will normally be generated, apart possibly from a brief
entry in the officer’s pocket book, is an internal report form or log for the computerised
Force Wide Incident Network. The reports are known as FWINs. They contain little detail.
What has hitherto been considered important by the GMP is the fact that suspicion has
been eliminated, rather than how it has been eliminated. In my view, it is highly desirable,
when important decisions (such as the decision not to pursue a criminal investigation of
a death) are taken, that the reasons for such decisions should be recorded. DCS Stelfox
was of the view that it would be beneficial to the GMP if officers attending a death were
required to record a brief written summary as to why suspicion had been excluded.
100
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Attendance of a Doctor When a Death Occurs Outside Normal Working
Hours
4.27 When a death occurs, or is discovered, during normal working hours, the deceased’s
general practitioner will usually attend to confirm the fact that death has occurred and will
indicate whether s/he is in a position to certify the cause of death. However, this is rarely
possible at night and at weekends, because of the increasing use made by general
practitioners of deputising doctor organisations (both commercial organisations and
general practitioner co-operatives). A deputising doctor will rarely know enough about the
patient to be able to say whether the patient’s general practitioner will be in a position to
issue an MCCD. However, s/he will be able to confirm that life is extinct. In many areas, it
appears that there is often delay in attendance by a deputising doctor, who might,
understandably, give priority to the urgent needs of the living. As a result, the police are
called out to an increasing number of deaths in which there is no suspicion of criminal
involvement. Also, there is more frequent resort to the ambulance service with requests to
confirm that death has occurred.
4.28 Two generations ago, relatives expected that the body of a deceased person would
remain at home, at least for several hours, if not until the day of the funeral. Nowadays,
expectations are different and most families wish and expect that the body will be
removed from home without delay. Although there is no specific rule to this effect, in
practice, once it is known that a doctor will issue an MCCD, the body can be taken to the
premises of a funeral director. If the doctor cannot issue an MCCD, the death will be
reported to the coroner and the body will usually be taken to a public or hospital mortuary
to await autopsy.
4.29 There are no rules of general application throughout the country as to what should happen
when a death occurs out of hours and it is not possible to discover whether the general
practitioner will be prepared to issue an MCCD. Difficulty or delay in establishing whether
the general practitioner will be prepared to do so may result in delay in the removal of the
body. It appears that there is a wide variation in different parts of the country as to the
practice relating to the confirmation of the fact of death and the removal of the body to a
public mortuary or to the premises of funeral directors.
4.30 The Inquiry contacted a number of organisations with a special interest in ‘out of hours’
and deputising doctor services. These included Nestor Healthcare Group plc, a large
public limited company operating 32 branches in England, Wales and Scotland, the
National Association of GP Co-operatives and a number of small local co-operatives. Their
evidence confirms that there is no consistent approach to the ‘out of hours’ death, whether
expected or unexpected.
Guidance from the British Medical Association
4.31 In April 1999, the General Practitioners’ Committee of the BMA issued guidance to
members as to their duties in respect of attendance following a death. This guidance
draws a distinction between what should happen in connection with an ‘expected’ death
and an ‘unexpected’ (which the Committee appeared to equate with ‘sudden’) death,
although these terms are not defined. The guidance presumes that doctors not only
101
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
understand the terms, but also recognise into which category a particular death falls. It
appears that an ‘expected’ death is one for which the general practitioner will be able to
issue an MCCD and an ‘unexpected’ death is one for which s/he will not.
4.32 The guidance suggests that where an ‘expected’ death occurs at the patient’s home, it is
‘wise’ (although not necessary) for the general practitioner to attend as soon as the urgent
needs of the living permit. When such a death occurs in a nursing or residential home, and
the general practitioner who attended during the last illness is available, it is ‘sensible’
(although not necessary) for him/her to attend ‘when practicable’ to issue an MCCD.
However, it advises that when an ‘on-call’ doctor is on duty, whether in or out of normal
working hours, it is unlikely that any useful purpose will be served by his/her attendance.
This appears to apply whether the death occurs in the deceased’s own home or in an
institution. It is said that the doctor should advise those in charge that they should contact
the funeral director if they want to have the body removed. He or she should also inform
the deceased’s general practitioner of the death, as soon as possible.
4.33 In the case of an ‘unexpected’ or ‘sudden’ death, the guidance suggests that, when the
death occurs in the patient’s own home, or in a nursing or residential home, the patient’s
registered general practitioner should attend to examine the body and confirm the death.
It does not deal with the position of the ‘on-call’ doctor in those circumstances. The
guidance suggests that, ‘in any other circumstances’, i.e. where the death does not
occur in the patient’s own home, or in a nursing or residential home, it is usually wise, and
especially so in the case of an ‘on-call’ doctor, to decline to attend and to advise that the
services of a retained police surgeon be obtained.
4.34 This advice assumes that the ‘on-call’ doctor, who does not know the patient, can
distinguish between an expected and an unexpected death without attending,
presumably in reliance upon what the caller says. In the event that the ‘on-call’ doctor
wrongly categorises the death as ‘expected’ and advises those in charge to contact the
funeral director, the body might initially be removed to the funeral director’s premises but
have to be taken to the mortuary later, when it is found that the death has to be reported
to the coroner.
4.35 In the light of this advice, it is obvious why there is often difficulty in arranging the
attendance of an ‘on-call’ or deputising doctor. In effect, they are advised not to attend.
It is also easy to see how confusion and uncertainty can arise about the removal of the
body. If the death is thought to be ‘expected’, the ‘on-call’ doctor might tell the caller to
instruct the funeral director to take the body away; however, the funeral director might
refuse to do so if no one has confirmed the fact of death. Then, a police surgeon or
paramedic might have to be called to confirm the fact of death before the body can be
moved.
Practice in Different Areas
4.36 The Inquiry heard evidence as to the different practices that prevail in different areas. In
some, those responsible for deputising services have issued guidance based on that
issued by the BMA.
102
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
4.37 In South Manchester, the Inquiry was told that there is no difficulty in arranging attendance
by a deputising doctor to confirm the fact of death. If it proves impossible to ascertain
whether the deceased’s general practitioner is able to certify the cause of death, and if the
deceased’s family is unwilling for the body to remain at the house until the next morning
or such other time as the general practitioner can be contacted, the police become
involved and, in effect, the death is reported to the Coroner. The body must be taken to
the local mortuary, pending further enquiries of the general practitioner. This follows a
ruling by Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner for Greater Manchester South, made in order to
avoid uncertainty about what should happen to the body until the general practitioner has
indicated whether or not s/he is able to certify the cause of death. On the day following the
death (or on the following Monday morning, if the death occurs over a weekend), a
coroner’s officer will contact the deceased’s general practitioner. If s/he is willing and able
to issue an MCCD, the body is released to the funeral director of the family’s choice. If the
deceased’s general practitioner is unwilling or unable to certify the cause of death, the
Coroner will accept jurisdiction and ‘take over’ the case. This process has the advantage
of certainty, although the result is that the police are involved in reporting to the Coroner
deaths which, in the event, are certified by a general practitioner.
4.38 In Surrey, the practice is similar to that in South Manchester. Mr Michael Burgess, HM
Coroner for Surrey, told the Inquiry that he expects the police to attend when the
deputising doctor or ambulance personnel have confirmed death but no MCCD can be
issued in the short term. The police have his authority to remove bodies to the local
mortuary pending the decision of the general practitioner.
4.39 Dr Nigel Chapman, HM Coroner for Nottinghamshire, said that, following consultation with
the Local Medical Committee and deputising doctor service in his area, an agreement has
been reached which avoids what are seen as ‘unnecessary’ attendances by deputising
doctors. In the case of an expected death occurring out of hours in a private home, nursing
home or residential home, the body of the deceased may be removed directly to a funeral
director’s premises, even though it has not been possible to obtain confirmation from the
treating general practitioner that s/he is in a position to certify the cause of death. When a
call is made to the deputising service, the doctor will enquire of the caller whether the fact
of death has been confirmed by a qualified nurse or paramedic. If not, the doctor will
attend. If the fact of death has been confirmed, the doctor will then enquire as to whether
the deceased had been seen by his/her general practitioner within 14 days before the
death and whether that doctor is likely to be able to issue an MCCD. If the fact of death
has been confirmed and it appears that the general practitioner will be able to issue an
MCCD, the deputising doctor will give permission, over the telephone, for the body to be
removed to the funeral director’s premises. Presumably, if the doctor is not satisfied, s/he
will direct that the police must be called, the death reported to the coroner and the body
taken to the mortuary. The Nottinghamshire practice appears to be based on the BMA
guidance but imposes a requirement on the on-call doctor to attend if the fact of death has
not been otherwise confirmed. It effectively avoids unnecessary police involvement and
reports to the coroner. However, there is a risk that the information on which the deputising
doctor bases his/her decision may not be satisfactory. The doctor will usually know
nothing of the background other than what s/he is told by the caller. There is a possibility
103
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
that, when the general practitioner learns of the death, it might after all have to be reported
to the coroner and the body transferred to the mortuary. Provided that the funeral director
has not begun any embalming process, no harm will have been done by such an error.
4.40 Kernowdoc, a general practitioner co-operative in Truro, Cornwall, operates according to
a protocol, in some respects similar to that operated in Nottinghamshire, again agreed
after consultation between the various interested parties. The Kernowdoc policy, in
relation to expected deaths in a nursing home, also includes a requirement that the
deceased’s general practitioner should have given advance written confirmation of the
fact that death is expected, before the body can be removed directly to the premises of
the funeral director. Where written confirmation is not available, either the body will remain
at the nursing home until the general practitioner can be contacted, or the duty doctor has
to attend before the body can be released. The policy does not relate to unexpected
deaths or deaths in private homes, which require the attendance of the duty doctor.
4.41 Doctors working for North Essex Doctors On Call Limited (NORDOC) are issued with
advice based on the BMA guidance, to which I referred above. They normally attend a
death occurring in a private home and make a judgement about whether the body should
be removed to the funeral director’s premises. In deciding whether to attend a death that
has occurred in a nursing or residential home, they rely on the judgement of the staff at the
home where the death occurs. Sometimes, they will take a decision to allow the body to
be moved to the funeral director’s premises following a telephone discussion.
4.42 Mr Christopher Dorries, HM Coroner for South Yorkshire (West), told the Inquiry that, in his
District, there is often a delay in securing the attendance of an ‘out of hours’ doctor, with
all the understandable distress that results. There is no protocol governing what happens
in the event of the expected ‘out of hours’ death. If the deputising doctor cannot be
persuaded to attend, a police officer attends the home and a police surgeon will be called
out to confirm the fact of death before the body can be transferred to the mortuary. If the
death has occurred late on a Friday afternoon, the body could quite easily remain in the
mortuary until the following Monday, when Mr Dorries’ staff will telephone the general
practitioner. If s/he is prepared to issue an MCCD, the body will then be transferred from
the mortuary to the funeral director’s premises. This system involves quite heavy use of
police resources.
4.43 The Metropolitan Police Force also reported difficulties in ensuring the attendance of a
deputising doctor and estimated that, in 10–15% of cases, there was a need to call out the
police surgeon to confirm death. Pending the arrival of the police surgeon, the attending
officer remains at the scene, which creates practical difficulties because the officer is
unavailable for deployment elsewhere. At a time when demands on police resources are
growing, this is obviously undesirable.
4.44 In West Yorkshire, where it appears that there must on occasions be delay or difficulty in
arranging the attendance of a doctor to confirm the fact of death, there is now a protocol
in existence by which a paramedic supervisor employed by the ambulance service can,
if necessary, be called out with the sole object of confirming the fact of death. This was felt
desirable in order to reduce the amount of police time that was being spent awaiting the
104
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
arrival of a doctor. This protocol avoids the use of police resources, but places an
additional and inappropriate burden on the ambulance service.
4.45 In the West Midlands, it seems to have been acknowledged that there is no sound reason
why the police should attend a death in which there is no suspicion of criminal
involvement, simply because it has not been possible to contact a general practitioner to
discover whether s/he is able to certify the cause of death. West Midlands Police Order
53/2002, issued in June 2002, provides that the police will no longer accept requests for
attendance at ‘routine presumed natural deaths in home circumstances from
doctors, hospitals, families or responsible adults’. The Inquiry has not received
evidence as to what happens if and when the police refuse to attend.
The Need for Clarity
4.46 It is clear that, at present, the procedures which operate in the immediate aftermath of a
death vary in different parts of the country. There is also some confusion about what is
expected of the police, ambulance and medical services. Without wishing to suggest that
uniformity must be achieved in all things, it does seem to me that both professionals and
the bereaved would be better served by a system in which the roles and duties of the
various services were clarified. The professionals and those responsible for the provision
of services should know what is expected of them so that they can allocate the resources
and provide the necessary training. The bereaved would also benefit. In the immediate
aftermath of a death, uncertainty about what is going to happen only increases distress.
4.47 There is also some tension between the services, which is not surprising, as attending at
a death is not the main function or purpose of the police, ambulance or medical services.
All have what might properly be regarded as more pressing duties in relation to the living.
4.48 For those reasons, it appears to me that there should be a nationally agreed policy for
dealing with the immediate aftermath of a death occurring in the community. There will, in
my view, always be a role for the police, the ambulance service and doctors. There must
always be some flexibility in the provision of these services, especially in respect of deaths
that occur at night and at weekends. However, because responsibility for dealing with the
aftermath of a death does not naturally fall within the remit of any of the existing services,
I shall consider whether it would be appropriate to allocate primary responsibility to those
whose function it is to deal with death, namely the coroners. I shall discuss this proposal
in greater detail later in this Report.
Further Involvement of the Police
4.49 So far, I have dealt with the duties of the police when summoned to attend a death in the
community. If it appears to the officer attending that there are circumstances suggestive
of criminal involvement, a police investigation will be set in motion. If it appears to the
police officer in attendance that there is no doctor willing and able to issue an MCCD, the
officer will report the death to the coroner. In that capacity, when reporting a death to the
coroner, the officer will, at the same time, carry out a limited investigation of the
circumstances of the death and complete one or more standard report forms. In their
105
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
capacity as coroner’s officers, the police are also sometimes involved in the investigation
of a death that has been reported to the coroner by others, such as a doctor or registrar.
In that situation in the GMP area, the same report forms are used whether the death is
reported to the coroner by the police or by others.
Sudden Death Report Forms
4.50 The police describe all deaths that they report to the coroner or investigate on the
coroner’s behalf as ‘sudden deaths’. The forms used for the report or investigation are
commonly known as ‘Sudden Death Report Forms’ or ‘Reports of Sudden Death’. The
police national training documentation defines a sudden death as any death involving
some form of police action. This does not mean that the death was ‘sudden’ in the usual
sense of the word.
4.51 The layout and content of the report forms vary from force to force. The forms commonly
require information as to the personal details, occupational history and known medical
history of the deceased. Some require details of the circumstances of the death and
sometimes also a description of the circumstances leading up to the discovery of the
death and of the death scene. Many require the provision of certain extra administrative
information. Some forms request the identification of the source of the information. Some
incorporate a statement of identification of the deceased but many police forces have a
separate form for that purpose. Some focus specifically on the possibility of suicide. Many
require details relating to the deceased’s property. None of the forms I have seen requires
a specific statement by the person confirming the fact of death.
4.52 The form in use in Cheshire appeared to me to be more comprehensive than those from
other areas. Also, a sample of completed forms from Cheshire suggested quite a high
standard of awareness of the type of information required. I saw a number of samples of
forms of this kind that are used in Scotland, where they are submitted to the procurator
fiscal. The forms in use in the Grampian and Strathclyde areas also appear to be more
comprehensive than some of the English ones I saw.
4.53 In the GMP area, in addition to providing the information for incorporation into the FWIN,
reporting officers complete two separate but related report forms, known as Form 751 and
Form 751A, which are left at the hospital mortuary for the attention of the coroner’s liaison
officer (CLO). Form 751A is designed specifically for the purpose of providing information
to the pathologist. Form 751 is directed to the coroner. Recently, the practice has changed
so that the coroner receives both forms, whereas previously s/he would not see Form
751A. According to Chief Constable’s Order 98/47, the role of the police in these
circumstances is to ‘helpthe coroner to find the cause of death’. However, the
information provided on these forms is scanty and no information is included about the
enquiries that led the police to conclude that the death did not give rise to suspicion of
criminal involvement.
4.54 Form 751, entitled ‘REPORT OF SUDDEN DEATH’, is addressed to the coroner and
requires the provision of personal and administrative information. The time, date and
place of death must be stated. A request on a previous version of the form for details of
the ‘time, date and place found and by whom’ is no longer included, which is, perhaps,
106
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
unfortunate. The current form provides a total of six lines in which to record a ‘brief
medical history’ and ‘brief circumstances of death’ and an earlier, but quite recent,
version of the form provided only three. The kind of information routinely provided under
this heading is very limited. For example, on the Form 751 relating to Miss May Lowe, who
I found was killed by Shipman, this section was completed thus: ‘Suffers from heart !
circulation problems. Has had a bad dose of flu for the last 4 weeks’. This information
had plainly been derived from the person present at the scene when the officer attended.
4.55 Form 751A, entitled ‘MEDICAL HISTORY IN A CASE OF SUDDEN DEATH’, is intended
to assist the pathologist who is to perform the autopsy. It requires the attending officer to
record the time, date and place of death and the time and date when the deceased was
last seen alive and by whom. There is a separate section for the brief circumstances of
death. This encouraged the officer in the case of Miss Lowe to state that Miss Lowe’s niece
had gone to the house, as she could not contact her aunt by telephone. She had entered
by the rear door and found her aunt ‘lying there’. That information had not been provided
on Form 751, although it would also be of use to the coroner. The section concerning the
medical history simply asked: ‘Was deceased receiving medical attention at time of, or
before death? If ‘Yes’ give details.’ On Miss Lowe’s form, the officer wrote: ‘Yes. Heart
! trouble with circulation’, although she did not mention the bad dose of ‘flu. The form
also sought details of any ‘permanent disability, long term illness or industrial
disease’. On Miss Lowe’s form, this is answered: ‘No’. The form asked whether drugs
have been prescribed and, if so, the details. It appears that the usual practice is to see
what drugs are at the bedside or in the bathroom and kitchen cupboard and to list those.
The form asked whether or not the deceased had access to drugs besides those listed
above. How reliable a negative answer to that question could ever be is doubtful and the
question is not on the most recent version of the form. Finally, Form 751A asks whether
there is any other information that may assist the pathologist to determine the cause of
death. This box is not completed very often. It is perhaps asking a lot to expect a patrol
officer to proffer such further details when s/he is very unlikely to know what type of
information would be helpful.
4.56 Forms 751 and 751A are unsatisfactory. First, they contain a number of questions which
are common to both; yet the officer is required to complete two separate forms instead of
making two copies of one form. This must increase the work the police officer has to do
and the repetition must also cause irritation. There is no possible justification for having
two forms, a fact that was acknowledged by many GMP witnesses who gave evidence.
Because the quality of completion of the forms is poor, the content has to be checked and
sometimes supplemented by the CLO who receives them. This leads to further duplication
of effort.
4.57 The Inquiry examined Form 751 and/or Form 751A in 32 cases involving GMP officers.
These revealed very variable standards of reporting. Some Forms 751 and 751A were
good, containing an appropriate amount of information, clearly expressed. Very many
contained little information and would be of scant value to the coroner or pathologist for
whose benefit they were intended. Such was the variability of standard that it appeared to
me that the problem was probably one of failure of training and supervision, rather than
individual shortcoming. Accordingly, I directed that the Inquiry should not send letters
107
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
warning of potential criticism (‘Salmon letters’) to individual police officers but only to the
GMP, as their employers. On behalf of the GMP, DCS Stelfox, in his written and oral
evidence, accepted the substance of those criticisms. I stress that none of the
shortcomings or failings to which I have referred resulted in Shipman escaping detection
for killings which might otherwise have been expected to be revealed. I should also say
that I heard criticism of the standards of completion of such forms by the officers of other
police forces besides the GMP.
4.58 Examination of the forms also revealed that the officer completing the form often had no
idea why the death had to be, or had been, reported to the coroner and what the issues
were that the coroner would have to decide. For example, in the case of Mrs Lily Shore, a
patient of Shipman who I found died a natural death and whose death had been certified
as due to bronchopneumonia, the coroner was investigating the question of whether a
road traffic accident, which Mrs Shore had suffered two months before her death, had
caused or contributed to her death. It could have done, if she had remained immobile for
a substantial period after the accident; she would have been vulnerable to chest infection.
The information needed was how Mrs Shore had been in the interval between the accident
and her death. Had she made a full recovery and had she been mobile? It is clear from
the answers given on the forms that the officer did not realise what the issues were.
DCS Stelfox explained that he would not expect the officer to realise why there was a
possible connection between the accident and the death, given the lapse of time of two
months and the officer’s lack of medical knowledge. Yet, that was the reason why the
coroner had to consider the death. DCS Stelfox also confirmed that the medical enquiries
made by police officers for the completion of the forms are extremely limited. If enquiry
had been made by a person who understood why there was a possibility of a causal link
between the accident and the bronchopneumonia which caused the death, it could have
been discovered that Mrs Shore’s accident had been a relatively minor one and she had
made a full recovery. There would then have been no need for an inquest or even an
autopsy.
4.59 I do not propose to burden this Report by further examples of this problem. Suffice it to say
that this, and other cases examined in the course of the hearings, have satisfied me that
the way in which deaths are reported to the coroner by the police, and investigated by the
police on the coroner’s behalf, is not satisfactory.
Is Police Involvement in the Investigation of Deaths for the Coroner
Appropriate?
4.60 I have said earlier that, in my view, there will always be some role for the police in the
aftermath of a death. They must attend if there is any possible suspicion of criminal activity.
They must attend if there is a need to break into premises or to locate a next of kin. If, while
carrying out any of these functions, they discover anything that ought to be reported to the
coroner, plainly they should do so. However, it is necessary to consider whether or not the
police should continue to fulfil their present roles as ‘coroner’s officers’, undertaking
responsibility for the admission of bodies to the mortuary and the completion of the forms
reporting the death.
108
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
4.61 It appears to me that there are several reasons why the police should no longer be
involved in the investigation of deaths that do not give rise to any suspicion of crime. First,
they do not have the skills or expertise necessary for the job. Second, they do not consider
it to be important to them as police officers and this contributes to the variable quality of
the work they do. Third, the work places a heavy burden on limited police resources.
Skills and Expertise
4.62 DCS Stelfox agreed that the standard of police handling of deaths which appear to involve
no suspicion of crime (non-suspicious deaths) is very variable. He explained that any
individual officer might attend such a death only once or twice a year. Procedures that are
not practised frequently are unlikely to be conducted to as consistently high a standard
as those that are performed often.
4.63 DCS Stelfox said that the police role should be to eliminate suspicion. Once this has been
done, others who could be better trained should undertake any further enquiries. He
accepted that police officers, who might attend a non-suspicious death only relatively
infrequently and who have no medical training, would not understand the purpose behind
the questions that they were asking. He said that, when an officer does not understand the
issues, s/he is likely merely to ask the question as it appears on the form and to record what
the witness says. He agreed that what was needed in such circumstances was a person
specially trained to investigate non-suspicious deaths. It would not be feasible to train the
entire uniformed police force to make this kind of enquiry satisfactorily, not least because
an individual officer might attend only a few non-suspicious deaths before being moved
away from patrol duties.
4.64 DCS Stelfox said that the lack of guidance on the issue of sudden deaths is likely to have
arisen from the tendency to separate non-suspicious deaths from ‘murder and
suspicious deaths’ within published policy and within the training environment. Hence,
murder and suspicious deaths are likely to be investigated by the application of a
focussed approach to investigation and crime scene management, whereas the
investigation of non-suspicious deaths is more procedural and concentrates on issues
surrounding the function of a coroner, identification of the deceased, the medical history
of the deceased and dealing with the bereaved relatives of the deceased.
4.65 DCS Stelfox explained that the traditional involvement of police officers in this task has
been based on an assumption within the police service that the basic investigative
procedures that officers employ when attending deaths, such as scene examination and
the interviewing of witnesses, are generic skills that they will have acquired during the
course of other duties and which need little adaptation to the investigation and reporting
of non-suspicious deaths. In his evidence to the Inquiry, he admitted that he was now of
the view that this assumption was flawed.
4.66 In my view, DCS Stelfox is right to say that generic police skills are not fitted to the
investigation of non-suspicious deaths. Moreover, the task does not utilise the skills in
which they have been trained. As I have already observed, this probably explains why the
police do not wish to be involved in this type of work and why they do not do it as well as
they might. It appears to me that the reporting and investigation of such deaths require
109
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
skills that most police officers do not possess. It is clear that many enquiries to be made
on a coroner’s behalf will entail medical issues and I am satisfied that a police officer with
no medical knowledge is not an appropriate person to undertake them.
Police Resources
4.67 Police attendance at deaths in which there is no suspicion of crime has an impact on
police manpower and resources. The GMP has recently analysed the time occupied by
attendance at 60 non-suspicious deaths. The average time involved was two and a half
hours. Other police forces contacted estimated varying periods of time, but the GMP
figure does not seem unrepresentative. PS Walker told the Inquiry that, as a supervisor,
he would effectively ‘write off’ for the duration of his shift any officer called to attend a
sudden death. Other officers spoke in similar terms of the effect on their shift of being
called out to attend sudden deaths.
Other Considerations
4.68 The interests of the family of the deceased may also make it inappropriate for the police
to attend at deaths in which there is no suspicion of criminal involvement. The Brodrick
Committee noted that some members of the public were aggrieved that a uniformed
police officer would call on them to take particulars of a death to which no suspicion of
crime attached. GMP officers reported that they had observed similar concerns. Police
Constable (PC) Rachel Mitchell and PC David James described their experience of the
discomfiture of bereaved families when the police attend a death in the middle of the night.
PC Mitchell said that attendance by uniformed officers in a marked vehicle, often in the
middle of the night, is quite daunting for the families. I find that wholly understandable.
Is There a Need for Police Involvement in All Deaths?
4.69 At present, the police do not attend most deaths in the community. They are certainly
summoned if there is any ground to suspect criminality. Otherwise, it seems to be largely
a matter of chance whether or not they become involved. In the light of the experience
gained during the Inquiry, I have had to ask myself whether there ought to be a
requirement for the police to attend every death, in order to rule out suspicion of foul play?
4.70 In my view, this should not be necessary and is not desirable from either the viewpoint of
the police or that of the families of the deceased. Usually, if there is any obvious reason to
suspect criminal involvement, a witness to the death, the person who discovers the body
or someone connected with the deceased will summon the police. If an ambulance is
called, the crew will be alert to observe anything out of the ordinary and will summon the
police if their suspicions are aroused. If there are suspicious signs that are not obvious,
they are unlikely to be detected by the attendance of a police officer. It will be very rare
that a sudden death not reported as a suspicious death will be identified as suspicious by
a patrol officer. I heard evidence to that effect from the individual officers who gave
evidence. DCS Stelfox considered that trained ambulance personnel were as well placed
as a police patrol officer to notice whether there were any suspicious signs. He would be
content if, in any case to which paramedics were summoned, they were to determine
110
SHIP03$$16 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
whether the circumstances of a death were or were not suspicious of criminal involvement.
I note that the Brodrick Committee (at paragraph 21.10 of its Report) doubted ‘whether a
policeman acting as coroner’s officer is any more likely than a properly trained
civilian working for a coroner to discover an unsuspected factor in a death which has
been reported to the coroner by a doctor or informant but was not reported to the
police immediately’.
4.71 In my view, it would not be satisfactory or sensible to require the police to attend every
death in order to rule out the possibility of concealed homicide or neglect, which must be
detected by other means. The involvement of the police in the investigation of deaths in
the community should be limited to those cases in which there is a suspicion of criminal
involvement. Insofar as they may be contacted to attend a death at which they are not
needed, provision should be made for them to report the death to someone with
professional responsibility for dealing with it.
Conclusions
4.72 The present arrangements for dealing with the aftermath of a death in the community are
unsatisfactory, especially in relation to deaths that occur out of normal working hours.
Their operation results in uncertainty for relatives of the deceased and the inappropriate
use of resources of the police and, arguably, the ambulance service. There is tension
between the providers of medical and emergency services. In my view, there should be
a policy governing the responsibilities of the various services, so that each knows what is
expected. However, although there will always be a role for the police, ambulance service
and doctors in dealing with the aftermath of a death, I consider that their roles should be
secondary to, and supportive of, a service with primary responsibility for dealing with
deaths in the community, both in and out of hours. In my view, this service should be based
in the coroner’s office and should be one of the duties of a team of well-trained coroner’s
officers. I shall describe this proposal in greater detail later in this Report. For the moment,
I say only that I base the proposal upon my belief that a task is performed better by those
who have been specifically trained to carry it out and for whom the task is important and
central to their work, rather than peripheral.
4.73 For the reasons I have explained, the present arrangements by which uniformed police
patrol officers act as coroner’s officers and are responsible for the initial investigation of
deaths which are to be or have been reported to the coroner are unsatisfactory and must
be replaced. The usual role of the police should be limited to the investigation of deaths
where there is some reason to suspect crime. My proposal will be that the investigation of
non-suspicious deaths should be carried out by a team of coroner’s officers or ‘coroner’s
investigators’.
111
SHIP03P004 25-06-03 11:47:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 2
CHAPTER FIVE
Medical Certification of the Cause of Death
The Existing System
The Duty of the Attending Doctor to Complete a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death
5.1 The systems of certification of the medical cause of death and the registration of deaths
remain much the same now as they were in 1927. The law is now governed by the Births
and Deaths Registration Act 1953.
5.2 Before a death can be registered, the cause of death must be certified by a registered
medical practitioner who has ‘attended’ the deceased during his/her ‘last illness’;
alternatively, the death must have been reported to the coroner and the appropriate
certificate provided by him/her. There is no statutory definition of the terms ‘attended’ or
‘last illness’.
5.3 Once a death occurs, it becomes important to identify the cause of the death. Apart from
cases in which an inquest has been opened and the coroner gives specific authorisation,
it is only when the cause of death has been certified that burial or cremation of the body
can take place. The individual most likely to be able accurately to identify the cause of
death is the doctor with the best knowledge of the deceased’s medical history, in
particular the history during the days and weeks immediately preceding death. In the case
of a death occurring in the community, this will usually be the deceased’s general
practitioner; where a death occurs in hospital, it will usually be a member of the medical
team responsible for the deceased’s care prior to death.
5.4 Section 22(1) of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 requires that:
‘In the case of the death of any person who has been attended during his
last illness by a registered medical practitioner, that practitioner shall
sign a certificate in the prescribed formstating to the best of his
knowledge and belief the cause of death ...’.
5.5 This section imposes on the doctor who has ‘attended’ the deceased during the ‘last
illness’ a duty to issue an MCCD whether or not s/he can identify the cause of death. This
is not sensible and, in practice, doctors issue an MCCD only if they can identify the cause
of death with sufficient confidence. If they cannot, they report the death to the coroner.
There is no statutory duty upon a doctor to make such a report, but there is a common law
duty on every citizen to give information which may lead to the coroner having notice of
circumstances requiring the holding of an inquest. Doctors now regard it as a professional
duty to report a death to the coroner if they are insufficiently certain of the cause or are
aware of other reasons why the death should be reported.
5.6 One of the most common reasons for a doctor to report a death to the coroner arises from
the so-called 14-day rule, which I have called the ‘either/or rule’. Regulation 41 of the
Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987, which in this respect is in the same
terms as the Registration (Births, Stillbirths, Deaths and Marriages) Consolidated
113
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Regulations 1927, imposes on the registrar a duty to report to the coroner any death where
it appears that the medical practitioner who has issued the MCCD had not either seen the
deceased within 14 days before death or seen the body after death. It appears that the
rule is widely misunderstood by medical practitioners, many of whom believe that they are
obliged to report a death to the coroner if they have not seen the deceased within 14 days
before death, regardless of whether or not they have seen the body after death.
Completion of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death
5.7 The form of the MCCD is prescribed by the 1987 Regulations. Books of MCCDs are issued
by local registrars of births and deaths to general practices, hospital wards or
departments and, sometimes, to individual general practitioners. MCCDs are supplied in
a book rather like a large cheque book. When a doctor has completed a certificate, s/he
tears it out of the book. He or she is then left with a counterfoil in the book on which s/he
records details of the certificate s/he has completed. Each book also contains notes,
giving detailed guidance on completion of the certificates. Different forms of certificate are
supplied for use in the case of a neonatal death or stillbirth; I shall confine my description
to the certificate prescribed for use in the case of a death occurring after the first 28 days
of life (Form 66). Ablank MCCD can be seen at Appendix B of this Report.
5.8 The MCCD requires the doctor to state the name and place of death of the deceased, the
date of the death and the deceased’s age, as stated to the doctor, and the date on which
the doctor last saw the deceased alive. The doctor is also required to circle the number
preceding one of the statements from the following group:
‘1. The certified cause of death takes account of information obtained
from post-mortem.
2. Information from post-mortem may be available later.
3. Post-mortem not being held.
4. I have reported this death to the Coroner for further action.’
5.9 The first three statements refer to the possibility that a ‘hospital’ post-mortem examination
(i.e. a post-mortem examination carried out for medical reasons with the consent of the
next of kin and not pursuant to an order of a coroner) may have taken place or be planned
for the future. In the majority of cases, the doctor will circle ‘3’, i.e. ‘Post-mortem not
being held’.
5.10 Then, the certifying doctor must circle the letter preceding one of a further three
statements, namely:
‘a. Seen after death by me.
b. Seen after death by another medical practitioner but not by me.
c. Not seen after death by a medical practitioner.’
5.11 In the majority of cases, the certifying doctor will circle ‘a’ or ‘b’, i.e. ‘Seen after death by
me’ or ‘Seen after death by another medical practitioner but not by me’. In a relatively
few cases, the answer will indicate that the deceased was not seen after death by any
medical practitioner.
114
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
5.12 The doctor must then state the cause of death, listing the disease(s) or condition(s) that
caused the death, in order of immediacy to the death itself. The chain of causation must
be set out in accordance with World Health Organisation guidelines. Under Part I(a), the
doctor should record the most immediate cause of death. At I(b), s/he should go on to
identify the disease or condition that led to the immediate cause of death. If the doctor
considers that there is a further link in the chain of causation, the relevant disease or
condition providing that link should be recorded at I(c). By way of example, if the death
had been precipitated by a brain haemorrhage, which resulted from cancer-related
secondaries in the brain, caused in turn by a primary carcinoma of the lung, the cause of
death should be set out as follows:
CAUSE OF DEATH
The condition thought to be the ‘Underlying Cause of Death’ should
appear in the lowest completed line of Part I.
I (a) Disease or condition directly
leading to death ……………………. Intracerebral haemorrhage ……………………………..
(b) Other condition, if any,
leading to I(a) ………………………. Cerebral metastases …………………………………….
(c) Other disease or condition, if any,
leading to I(b) ……………..……….. Squamous cell carcinoma of the left main bronchus
II Other significant conditions
CONTRIBUTING TO THE DEATH but
not related to the disease or condition ………………… Diabetes mellitus…………………………
causing it ……………………………………………………………………………………………
5.13 The guidance contained in the book of MCCDs states that the statement of cause of death
should be as specific as possible. Hence, in the example above, the site of the primary
tumour (the left main bronchus) is specified, in addition to details of the histology
(squamous cell). Diabetes mellitus is identified in Part II as a condition that has contributed
to the death but was not part of the main causal sequence leading to death. The guidance
notes contained in the book of MCCDs make the point that Part II should not be used to
list all the medical conditions from which the deceased person suffered at the time of
his/her death; only those which played a part in causing the death, perhaps by hastening
it, should be included. If there is only one condition that led to the death, with no
antecedents, it is acceptable to identify only one cause of death (e.g. ‘I(a) subarachnoid
haemorrhage’).
5.14 The guidance notes remind doctors that it is not acceptable to state as the only cause of
death a mode of dying (e.g. heart failure). This gives no indication as to why the patient
died and, if it is stated on the MCCD, should result in the death being referred to the
coroner by the registrar. An underlying cause of death (e.g. myocardial infarction) must
115
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
be given. Alist of terms that imply a mode of dying, rather than the cause of death, is set
out in the guidance notes.
5.15 The MCCD also seeks information about the approximate interval that elapsed between
the onset of each condition identified in the ‘Cause of Death’ section of the certificate. This
information is not entered in the register of deaths (although it is valuable for statistical
purposes) and provision of the information is not obligatory. As a consequence, this
information is, the Inquiry was told, rarely provided.
5.16 Where the certifying doctor believes that the death was or might have been directly
contributed to by the employment followed at some time by the deceased, s/he is required
to tick the ‘Spearing box’. Some employment-related causes of death are listed on the
reverse side of the MCCD and a more detailed list appears in the guidance notes.
5.17 The certifying doctor is required to declare:
‘I hereby certify that I was in medical attendance during the above named
deceased’s last illness, and that the particulars and cause of death
above written are true to the best of my knowledge and belief.’
5.18 He or she must then sign the form and state his/her qualifications, as registered with the
General Medical Council. In the case of a hospital death, the name of the consultant
responsible for the care of the patient must also be given.
Delivery of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death to the Registrar
5.19 Having completed the MCCD, the doctor is then obliged to deliver to a ‘qualified
informant’ notice in writing that a certificate has been signed. Those persons qualified to
give information for the registration of a death are specified in section 16 (where the death
occurred in a house) and section 17 (other deaths) of the Births and Deaths Registration
Act 1953. Usually, the informant will be the nearest surviving relative of the deceased or,
if there are no relatives, the person who is making the funeral arrangements. The Act
requires that the doctor completing the MCCD shall ‘forthwith deliver that certificate to
the registrar’. In practice, this does not happen. Instead, the doctor hands over the
MCCD (usually in a sealed envelope) to the informant or some other family member. The
informant then delivers the MCCD, usually still in its envelope, to the registrar, at the same
time as attending to fulfil his/her duty to report the death to the registrar for births and
deaths for the sub-district in which the death occurred.
The Purposes of the System
5.20 There are three main purposes to be served by a modern system of certification and
registration of deaths. One is to provide an accurate record of deaths for administrative
purposes. Another is to identify, as accurately as is practicable, the cause of each death.
This information is needed for the purposes of medical research and for the allocation of
the resources of the National Health Service. Athird is that the system should provide a
safeguard against the concealment of homicide and neglect leading to death. This third
purpose should be served in two related ways: first, by providing a deterrent against crime
116
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
or neglect before it takes place and, second, by providing a means of detecting crime or
neglect that has already occurred.
5.21 The first of these purposes is satisfactorily achieved by the procedure of registering the
death. The evidence received by the Inquiry shows that the second objective is achieved
by the present system to a reasonable degree of satisfaction. Dr Cleone Rooney, a
medical epidemiologist employed by the Office for National Statistics (ONS), the body
responsible for the collation of data relating to causes of death, said that, although the
information relating to causes of death is not entirely accurate, the present arrangements
achieve enough accuracy and consistency for the purposes to which the ONS put the
statistics. That is not to say that the ONS is not always anxious to improve the accuracy of
information provided and to improve the speed at which the information becomes
available. However, it is in respect of the third purpose that the present system is seen to
have failed, in that it did not deter Shipman from killing patients over a period of 24 years;
nor did it detect that he had killed any of his 215 victims.
The Strengths and Weaknesses of the System
5.22 In considering the strengths and weaknesses of the current system, I am dealing only with
the system of certification, registration and reporting to the coroner that applies to all
deaths, regardless of the method by which the family chooses to dispose of the body. As
will already be apparent from Chapter Three, a separate system of certification applies to
deaths to be followed by cremation; this imposes additional requirements. I shall consider
that system further in Chapter Eleven.
The Advantages of the Present Arrangements
5.23 The present arrangements for death certification and registration have three very real
advantages. They are speedy, cheap and convenient. Usually, the doctor who is going to
issue the MCCD will do so within a very short time of the death. As the doctor has treated
the patient during the last illness, s/he should be familiar with the medical history and the
task of completing the MCCD should take only a few minutes. Most doctors will be able to
complete the certificate and give it to a relative within about a day of the death. The doctor
is not permitted to charge a fee for the issue of the MCCD, so there is no expense to the
family. Registration is not usually inconvenient, at least for relatives who live in the same
area as the deceased. The register office is open every weekday and the informant may,
if s/he wishes, attend without appointment. Registration is free, although there is a charge
for the certified copies of the entry in the register that will be needed to settle the
deceased’s financial affairs. As was apparent with many of the deaths examined by the
Inquiry, it is often possible to register a death within a day or two of its occurrence.
Sometimes, there is a delay if the certifying doctor is off duty or decides that s/he wishes
to discuss the case with the coroner. If the death is reported to the coroner, an autopsy
may result in some delay in registration. However, in the majority of cases where the doctor
issues an MCCD, the formalities proceed quite smoothly. In some areas, registrars
provide a special weekend service for members of minority religious groups who wish to
bury their dead very shortly after death.
117
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
The Main Weakness: Dependence on a Single Medical Practitioner
5.24 The very feature that gives rise to the advantages to which I have just referred also gives
rise to the major weakness, namely dependence on a single medical practitioner. Only
about 38% of deaths are reported to the coroner. All other deaths are registered on the
basis of an MCCD issued by a single doctor, who certifies the cause of death, saying that
s/he has attended the deceased in the last illness, and provides the cause of death ‘to the
best of [his/her] knowledge and belief’. If the MCCD is in order, that is, if it appears to
the registrar that the certificate has been properly completed by a doctor who appears to
be qualified to issue it and that the cause of death is acceptable, the death will be
registered.
5.25 Adoctor’s decision as to whether or not s/he should report a death to the coroner or can
properly certify the cause of the death is a matter for the doctor. If s/he decides to issue
an MCCD and not to report the death, the decision is subject to very little check or control.
Despite the recommendations of the Brodrick Committee in 1971 that there should be,
there is still no statutory duty upon a doctor to report any death to the coroner. Provided
that the doctor completes the MCCD fully and in appropriate terms, there is no check on
the truth or accuracy of what s/he states. The registrar is under a duty to report certain
classes of case to the coroner. However, in practice, as I shall explain in Chapter Six, the
registrar has very little opportunity to discover whether or not the death should be
reported. Similarly, although it is open to any member of the public to report a death to the
coroner, this only rarely happens in practice. Many people do not even know that it is open
to them to make such a report, let alone that they have a common law duty to do so in
certain circumstances. Even if they did, most people would not challenge the word of a
doctor who said that it was not necessary to report a death.
5.26 It follows that the present system depends almost entirely on the good faith and judgement
of the doctor who signs the MCCD or decides that the case should be reported to the
coroner. It also depends on the courage and independence of doctors, for the system
places upon them some responsibility to police their colleagues, for example by refusing
to certify a death which may have been contributed to by some misconduct, lack of care
or medical error on the part of a professional colleague. It may not be easy for a junior
member of the clinical team responsible for the care of the deceased to withstand the
expectation that s/he will certify the cause of death, rather than report the case to the
coroner for investigation.
5.27 So long as doctors do their best, in good faith, to report those cases where they are
insufficiently sure of the cause of death and are vigilant in respect of signs of criminality or
neglect by others, including other members of the medical profession, the present system
should work. I have no doubt that the great majority of doctors perform their duties of
certification conscientiously.
5.28 However, because it depends so heavily on the good faith, judgement, courage and
independence of the certifying doctor, the present system of certification and registration
does not provide adequate protection against the concealment of homicide by the
certifying doctor him/herself. That Shipman was able to kill so many times, without
triggering any alarm bells within the system, is proof of that. It is often said that there will
118
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
never be ‘another Shipman’ and that the system should not be changed radically just
because of him. However, we have no means of knowing how many cases of homicide by
doctors and other health professionals remain undiscovered. Nor do we know how many
medical errors or incidents of misconduct or neglect leading to death go undetected.
Ideally, the system of certification should reveal this sort of incident. In my view, that ideal
is not achievable in every case. However, the system can and should be more robust than
at present.
The Paucity of Information Contained in the Completed Medical Certificate of Cause of
Death
5.29 In my opinion, one of the major shortcomings of the existing system of death certification
is that the MCCD requires the provision of so little information. It does not call for a
summary of the relevant medical history or even a brief account of the events leading to
death. It requires only a bare statement of the cause of death. There is, to the right of the
‘Cause of Death’ box, an opportunity for the doctor to state, if s/he wishes, the period of
time that has elapsed since the onset of the conditions advanced as causes of death. If
that information is provided, it gives some limited insight into the deceased’s medical
history. However, it is often not provided. The MCCD calls for much less information than
cremation Form B.
5.30 During Phase One of the Inquiry, I became aware that, in a case where the deceased had
been buried and there was therefore no cremation Form B, there was no available record
of any account by Shipman of the deceased’s medical history or of the events leading to
the death. The MCCD would provide the date on which Shipman claimed to have last seen
the deceased before death but that was all the information available. Thus, even if the
registrar possessed the knowledge necessary to evaluate the medical information
contained on the MCCD, no history is provided. If a death is reported to the coroner, s/he
has no written account of the history, only the note made over the telephone during the
doctor’s oral report to the coroner’s officer. Although a clear medical history should be
available in the medical records, this is not always the case. Often there is no account of
the circumstances of the death. In any event, the medical records are not available either
to the registrar or to the coroner when s/he is considering whether to take the case over
or to invite the doctor to issue an MCCD.
5.31 In my view, any certificate of medical opinion concerning the cause of death should
contain a short history, focussed on the condition which the doctor believes has caused
the death. Such an account, including the main features of the chain of events leading to
death, would serve several useful purposes. First, it would clarify the doctor’s own thought
processes about the underlying causes of death. Second, it would facilitate a professional
evaluation of the opinion by another doctor or by a coroner. Third, if discussed with the
next of kin or a family member who knew the deceased, it would prevent or deter the
advancement of a false account. Indeed, I believe that, if Shipman had had to provide
such an account, knowing that the family of the deceased would become aware of it, this
would have been a real deterrent. Even if he had not been deterred, I think it likely that,
sooner or later, discrepancies between the account he had given and what the relatives
119
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
knew to be the case would have led to enquiries being made into the circumstances of
some of the deaths.
The Uncertainty about the Meaning of ‘Attendance During the Last Illness’
5.32 Another shortcoming of the MCCD is the uncertainty that arises in respect of the essential
qualification before a doctor may issue. This is that s/he was ‘in medical attendance’ on
the deceased during the ‘last illness’. The ‘last illness’ is not defined and its
interpretation gives rise to uncertainty. In her witness statement, Dr Rooney told the Inquiry
that the basic principle is that, in order to be qualified to sign, the doctor should have been
directly involved in the medical care of the patient in connection with the illness which led
to the death. He or she need not have been solely responsible. Care might have been
shared with other members of the clinical team in hospital or with a partner in general
practice. Even a locum general practitioner may be able to issue the certificate. Dr Rooney
said that the doctor could not be said to have been attending the patient ‘during his last
illness’ unless s/he had diagnosed the illness leading to death before the death occurred
and was giving treatment or advice in respect of that condition.
5.33 It may well be that the overwhelming majority of doctors abide by these principles.
However, I note that they are not explained as part of the guidance given to doctors on
completion of the MCCD. I think that many doctors do not regard it as necessary to have
diagnosed the potentially fatal condition before death. Many elderly people die with a
variety of conditions, any one of which could lead to death. Examples are ischaemic heart
disease, congestive heart failure and hypertension. However, such conditions are often
treatable and are controlled by medication. The patient might live for many years with such
a condition and then might die after only a brief deterioration. In many such cases, there
is no identifiable ‘last illness’. I have the impression that many doctors, wishing to issue
an MCCD, feel entitled to say that they have attended the deceased during the last illness
if they are the patient’s usual doctor. It is undesirable that a doctor should certify that s/he
has attended a patient in the ‘last illness’ if there is no identifiable last illness.
The Uncertainty about the Degree of Confidence Needed before Certifying the Cause of
Death
5.34 Afurther shortcoming of the MCCD is that it is not clear how confident a doctor must be
of the cause of death before s/he should feel able to issue an MCCD and submit it to the
registrar, without drawing attention to any uncertainty as to the cause. As I have said, the
doctor who has attended the deceased during the last illness is under a statutory duty to
issue an MCCD stating the cause of death to the best of his/her knowledge and belief.
Most doctors who feel insufficiently confident of the cause of death decline to certify and
instead refer the death to the coroner. The statutory requirement imposes on the doctor a
duty of good faith, but does not provide any guidance as to the necessary degree of
confidence. No guidance is provided for the doctor in the notes contained in the book of
MCCDs. Dr Rooney told the Inquiry that the doctor should be ‘reasonably sure’ of the
cause of death, but the Inquiry has not been referred to any official documents in which
that advice is promulgated. In any event, that expression is not clear.
120
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
5.35 Nor is the doctor explicitly required to exercise his/her own professional judgement. The
MCCD does not require the doctor to state the sources of his/her knowledge and belief.
Adoctor might issue an MCCD after a very brief personal contact with the patient,
believing that what another doctor has told him/her about the patient’s condition is true,
but not exercising his/her own judgement.
5.36 Evidence given to the Inquiry suggests that there is much uncertainty about the standard
of confidence required before a doctor should issue an MCCD. Opinions and practices
vary. Some doctors say that they feel able to sign if they think that they know the probable
cause of death. Others are unwilling to sign unless they feel a much higher degree of
confidence. It is worth mentioning that, according to the evidence of the registrars from
whom I heard, if a doctor reveals that s/he is relying on a ‘probable’ cause of death, the
registrar will reject the MCCD on the ground that the cause of death appears to be
‘unknown’.
5.37 It was suggested in evidence that good practice requires that the standard of confidence
appropriate for the diagnosis of a cause of death should be the same degree of
confidence that the doctor would apply when diagnosing the condition of a live patient.
That may be a variable standard, depending on the nature of the condition and the
treatment contemplated. However, this suggests that the standard of confidence should
be higher than the mere balance of probabilities.
5.38 In my view, the existing requirement (to state the cause of death ‘to the best of [the
doctor’s] knowledge and belief’) is unacceptably vague. I have already mentioned that
the Brodrick Committee recommended that the doctor should be required to certify the
cause of death ‘with accuracy and precision’. It appears to me that that suggested an
unrealistically high standard. However, I agree with the Brodrick Committee that a
standard of confidence for certification should be imposed. I shall discuss what that
standard should be later in this Report. One of the difficulties about certification by
doctors is that of training them to assess whether the appropriate standard has been
reached in any particular case. Many doctors certify a cause of death only a few times
each year. Any skill that is not practised regularly is likely to decline.
Inappropriate Attitudes to Certification of the Cause of Death
5.39 Uncertainty about the degree of confidence required before a doctor should issue the
MCCD may be the reason why certain doctors appear to think that their duty of certification
is to some extent discretionary. Mr Christopher Dorries, HM Coroner for South Yorkshire
(West), drew attention to a study published in 19931, which reported that 18.5% of general
practitioners admitted that they might ‘modify’ what they considered to be the true cause
of death in order not to distress relatives. Just over 17% of general practitioners might
make a similar modification so as not to involve the coroner. In research2 in which
Mr Dorries himself was involved, two doctors admitted that they would record a natural
cause of death rather than report a case of potential suicide to the coroner, so as to avoid
1 Maudsley, G and Williams, EMI (1993) ‘Death certification by House Officers and General Practitioners – practice and performance’,
Journal of Public Health Medicine, Vol 15, No 2, pp 192–201.
2 Start, RD, Usherwood, TP, Carter, N, Dorries, CP, Cotton, DWK (1995) ‘General practitioners’ knowledge of when to refer deaths to a
coroner’, British Journal of General Practice, April 1995, pp 191–193.
121
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
financial loss to the family. Mr Dorries and Mr Michael Burgess (HM Coroner for Surrey),
both experienced coroners, suggested that some doctors certify the cause of death, even
though they are doubtful about it, because they wish to save the family distress.
5.40 It appears that doctors may sometimes be put under pressure, either expressly or
implicitly, by the relatives of the deceased to issue a certificate, even though they are in
doubt about the cause of death. Families are often worried by the thought that the death
may have to be reported to the coroner and may be distressed at the thought of an
autopsy. On the other hand, the doctor should realise that, if s/he certifies a cause of death
without a sufficient degree of confidence, the certificate is of little value and the rigour of
the system of certification is undermined.
5.41 The Inquiry has not heard evidence from any doctor who admits that s/he is less than
conscientious in the performance of his/her duty of certification. I would not expect to hear
such an open admission. Nonetheless, I think it likely that such practices occur, although
only with a minority of doctors. The research tends to confirm this view.
The Poor Quality of Certification and Lack of Training
5.42 Even though the requirements of the existing MCCD are very limited, it appears that some
doctors have difficulty in completing it satisfactorily. Many doctors receive no advice on
their duties of death certification during training although, for some, a lecture might be
available. General practitioners usually receive some guidance during their vocational
training. Hospital doctors, in their pre-registration year, are often expected to complete
MCCDs with very little help from their senior colleagues. This is despite the guidance
contained in the book of MCCDs which states:
‘Death certification should preferably be carried out by a consultant or
other senior clinician. Delegation of this duty to a junior doctor who was
also in attendance should only occur if he/she is closely supervised.’
5.43 Several witnesses told the Inquiry that, when the new twice-yearly intake of house officers
arrives at the local hospital, there is a noticeable (albeit temporary) decline in the standard
of certification. Mr Dorries said that he believes that hospital bereavement officers (who
are not medically qualified) often have to advise doctors who are about to issue an MCCD
that the death is one which ought to be reported to the coroner. He said that doctors who
come to this country already qualified as medical practitioners, with no knowledge of our
legal requirements, are not tested on their understanding of what is required in death
certification.
5.44 The poor quality of death certification has been regularly illustrated by research
conducted over the years. Research conducted recently3 confirms that standards of
death certification are still poor. Of 1000 completed MCCDs examined, only 55% were of
an acceptable standard. Nearly 10% were very poor, being illogically or inappropriately
completed. This research was conducted at a teaching hospital, where standards might
be expected to be higher than elsewhere. In a useful review of death certification
3 Swift, B and West, K (2002) ‘Death Certification: an audit of practice entering the 21st century’, Journal of Clinical Pathology, No 55,
pp 275–279.
122
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
practice4, the authors point out that education is frequently suggested as a mechanism
for improving the accuracy of death certification. However, the evidence for its efficacy is
sparse and not encouraging5,6, prompting Dr Ryk James, a forensic pathologist who
participated in one of the Inquiry’s seminars, to conclude7 that ‘there is no ‘‘quick fix’’
for the problem’ and that even postgraduate education programmes might not result in
significant improvement, assuming there was a will to institute such programmes. This
view is also expressed in the article by Swift and West (see above) who observed that
death certification practice had not improved despite the introduction of formal education
on certification into the medical student curriculum in one UK medical school.
5.45 In my view, the completion of an MCCD is an important duty, a fact which, in the past, has
received insufficient recognition from the profession and from those responsible for
medical training. Moreover, there is no system of audit or review of doctors’ performance
of their duties in connection with death certification.
Reporting a Death to the Coroner
Difficulty in Recognising Reportable Deaths
5.46 As I have said, doctors have voluntarily assumed the primary responsibility for reporting
deaths to the coroner. Many such reports are made because the doctor is uncertain about
the cause of death. However, even if the doctor is quite satisfied as to the cause of death,
s/he should also consider whether the death is reportable for some other reason. Because
there is no statutory duty on the doctor, there is no statutory list of reportable deaths for
the doctor to consult. Guidance, in the form of a list of circumstances in which a death must
be reported, is provided in the book of MCCDs issued to doctors. Some coroners issue a
list of the types of case that they require to be reported. These lists are broadly based on
regulation 41 of the Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987, which governs the
categories of death that the registrar is obliged to report to the coroner: see paragraph
6.12. However, some coroners extend the scope of their lists beyond the provisions of the
regulation and seek to impose additional ‘local rules’. Different lists are in circulation in
different coroners’ districts. Doctors usually seek to comply with the wishes of their local
coroner, but do not always succeed as well as they should. Particular difficulties are
experienced when a doctor moves from one coroner’s jurisdiction to that of another.
5.47 Studies by Dr Roger Start, a consultant histopathologist who participated in one of the
Inquiry’s seminars, and others (including Mr Dorries), undertaken in 1993 and 1995,8
showed that both general practitioners and hospital doctors had difficulty in recognising
the circumstances in which a death should be reported to the coroner. In the 1993 study,
4 Maudsley, G, Williams, G, Williams, EMI (1996) ‘Inaccuracy in death certification. Where are we now?’, Journal of Public Health Medicine,
Vol 18, No 1, pp 59–66.
5 Weeramanthri, T, Beresford, W, Sathiananthran, V (1993) ‘An evaluation of an education intervention to improve death certification
practice’, Australian Clinical Review, No 13, pp 185–189.
6 Pain, CH, Aylia, P, Taub, NA et al. (1996) ‘Death certification: production and evaluation of a training video’, Medical Education, No 30,
pp 434–439.
7 James, DS, Bull, AD (1996) ‘Information on death certificates: cause for concern?’, Journal of Clinical Pathology, 1996, No 49, pp 213–216.
8 Start, RD, Delargy-Aziz, Y, Dorries, CP, Silcocks, PB, Cotton, DWK (1993) ‘Clinicians and the coronial system: ability of clinicians to
recognise reportable deaths’, British Medical Journal, Vol 306, 17th April 1993, pp 1038–1041; Start et al. ‘General practitioners’ knowledge
of when to refer deaths to a coroner’ (see footnote 2, p. 121).
123
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
135 clinicians of various grades from the general medical and surgical firms of a large
teaching hospital considered 16 fictitious case histories. Fourteen of the histories
contained a clear indication for referral to the coroner. The clinicians were asked to decide
whether the case should be referred and to give reasons. The case histories were also
considered by two coroner’s officers and two deputy coroners from Mr Dorries’ office in
Sheffield. The study found that the average percentage of correct answers for clinicians
in each grade was between 56% and 69%. Consultants fared slightly worse than house
officers. Senior registrars were the most successful. By way of example, 20 out of 34
consultants failed to recognise the need to report the death of a 49 year old paraplegic
who had suffered spinal injuries in an accident at work 15 years earlier. He had been
transferred from the spinal injuries unit suffering from septicaemia resulting from infected
sacral sores. Despite treatment, he developed a chest infection and died. The death
should have been reported, as the cause was plainly related to the spinal injuries
sustained in an accident at work.
5.48 If this pattern of poor recognition were to be repeated in practice, it would suggest that
many deaths that ought to be reported to the coroner are not. It was noted that clinicians
appeared to have the greatest difficulty in recognising when to report a death associated
with medical treatment. The coroner’s officers and deputy coroners all identified correctly
the reportable cases. Although Dr Start and his colleagues did not draw this express
conclusion, it is apparent to me that the reason for this is that they are dealing with the
relevant issues regularly day after day, whereas any clinician will apply his/her mind to the
problem less frequently.
5.49 In the 1995 study, 196 general practitioners, two coroner’s officers and two deputy
coroners considered 12 fictitious case histories, ten of which contained an indication for
referral to the coroner. On average, the general practitioners scored just over 70%, a
rather better result than the hospital clinicians. Only six general practitioners achieved a
maximum score. Fifteen and a half per cent recognised half, or fewer than half, of the
reportable cases. Again, the coroner’s officers and deputy coroners all achieved full
marks. Mr Dorries told the Inquiry that there was no reason to suppose that doctors would
perform any better today than they had done in 1993 and 1995.
5.50 The Inquiry has heard that some doctors never report a death to the coroner. It seems
unlikely that this is because no death certified by them ever comes within the categories
of reportable deaths. It is more likely that the doctor does not know which deaths should
be reported or does know but is seeking to spare families the ordeal of a report to the
coroner and a possible autopsy. It may be that the doctor has personal objections to the
autopsy process.
5.51 On examination of a random selection of registrars’ referrals to the South Manchester
Coroner’s office, the Inquiry came across an example of a doctor’s failure to refer an
obviously reportable case to the coroner. Ayoung man attempted suicide by taking an
overdose of insulin. The police investigated and found a note. The man was admitted to
hospital, where he survived for some weeks in a coma. When he died, a hospital doctor
certified that the death was caused by I(a) right basal pneumonia, (b) persistent
vegetative state and II Type 1 diabetes mellitus with insulin overdose and hypoglycaemic
124
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
brain injury. The registrar queried the MCCD because of the inclusion of the words
‘overdose’ and ‘injury’. The informant, the deceased’s sister, told the registrar about the
attempt at suicide and the subsequent investigation. The registrar reported the death to
the coroner. Amember of the coroner’s staff spoke to the doctor and asked him why he
had certified the death and had not reported it to the coroner. His response was that he
had done nothing wrong. The deceased had died of pneumonia, which was a natural
cause. Plainly, that doctor had no understanding at all of the circumstances in which a
death should be reported to the coroner. Another example was provided by Dr Richard
Hardman, Medical Referee at Stockport crematorium since 1990. He received cremation
forms which revealed that the deceased had been found dead in his car. The cause of
death was said to be asphyxia. Suspecting that the deceased might have committed
suicide, Dr Hardman reported the death to the coroner. After an autopsy and inquest, a
verdict of suicide was entered. Yet a doctor had been prepared to certify the cause of
death without referring the death to the coroner, which was obviously the proper course
in the circumstances.
5.52 There is no system of audit or review of those cases where the doctor certifies the cause
of death and does not report the death to the coroner. The cases that I have referred to
above only came to light because words indicative of an unnatural death were used in the
‘Cause of Death’ section of the MCCD. There may be many cases where there is no such
automatic trigger and where a death that should have been reported to the coroner goes
undetected. If that happens, and the deceased is to be buried, there is no subsequent
procedure that would bring to light a failure to report. If the death is to be followed by
cremation, it is possible that the failure might be revealed by the cremation certification
procedures. However, as I shall explain in Chapter Eleven, this may well not be the case.
5.53 I conclude that the present arrangements whereby, in practice, doctors decide whether
or not to report a death to the coroner, are not satisfactory. From the research, it would
appear that more reliable decisions would result if coroners or coroner’s officers, who deal
with the issue of reportability on a daily basis, were responsible for this process. However,
I recognise that the coroner’s officers from Sheffield, who took part in this research, are
more experienced than many and have had the advantage of working under the
supervision of Mr Dorries, who is very knowledgeable about coronial law and, I think,
requires high standards from his officers. If coroner’s officers are to make such decisions,
they must be trained and their capability tested.
When the Doctor Believes that the Death Must Be Reported
5.54 If a doctor is insufficiently confident that s/he knows the cause of death or realises that,
although the cause is known, there is some other reason to report the death to the coroner,
s/he will usually telephone the coroner’s office. Because there is no statutory duty on the
doctor to report the death, there is no formal or official means of making the report. No
prescribed form is supplied for the purpose. The report is usually made informally, by
telephone. The doctor will speak to the coroner’s officer and will explain the reason why
s/he is making the report. The coroner’s officer might decide to take over responsibility for
the death and might consult the coroner before making the decision. The doctor might
125
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
hear no more about it although, in some cases, s/he will be asked to provide a statement
or report about the death and may have to attend to give evidence at an inquest.
5.55 The legal position is that, when the coroner is informed of a death, s/he must decide
whether the death gives rise to a reasonable suspicion that the circumstances call for an
inquest, i.e. that the death was violent or unnatural or occurred while the deceased was
in prison or other specified forms of custody or that the death was sudden and the cause
is unknown. If there is no such reasonable suspicion, the coroner has no jurisdiction to take
on the case. Some doctors complain that, if they telephone to say that they are not
sufficiently sure of the cause of death, the coroner (or more likely the coroner’s officer) will
indicate that s/he is not willing to accept the case (an oft-used phrase seems to be that
‘the coroner won’t be interested’) and will seek to persuade the doctor to issue an MCCD.
The doctor feels under pressure to do so because, if the coroner will not accept the case
and the doctor refuses to issue an MCCD, the relatives are unable to register the death or
dispose of the body.
5.56 Coroners deny that this kind of situation ever arises. They say that they are always willing,
even anxious, to take on cases that require investigation. It may be that sometimes the
problem is one of misunderstanding or of differing perceptions of the respective roles of
the coroner’s office and the certifying doctor. The coroner or coroner’s officer might
genuinely believe that the doctor is being over-cautious about certifying the cause of
death. However, as I shall explain in Chapter Seven, there is evidence that doctors are
sometimes put under pressure to issue an MCCD.
When the Doctor Is in Doubt about Whether to Report the Death
5.57 Many doctors make a practice of telephoning the coroner’s office to discuss a death, if
they are in doubt about whether they should report the death or whether it would be in
order for them to issue an MCCD. Some will telephone to seek a dispensation in relation
to some aspect of the rules with which they cannot comply. It is quite common for a doctor
to seek and receive permission to issue an MCCD in respect of a death which the registrar
would be bound to report to the coroner, for example, because the doctor has not seen
the deceased within 14 days before death or seen the body after death. Although some
telephone calls are made for the purpose of reporting a death, many are made for the
purpose of seeking advice. Some coroners encourage such informal discussions. These
discussions are, to a very large extent, controlled by the coroner. I shall discuss them in
greater detail in Chapter Seven.
No Certificate of the Fact of Death
5.58 Another shortcoming of the present system is that there is no requirement that a doctor or
any other health professional should certify the fact that the deceased has died. It is quite
possible for a family member to conclude that death has occurred, to telephone the doctor
to say so and for the doctor to issue an MCCD without seeing the body. In practice, as I
have explained in Chapter Four, it is usual for a doctor or paramedic to check that the
person has indeed died, but there is no legal requirement that this should be done. Nor
126
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
is there any requirement that any record should be made of the time or circumstances of
the death.
5.59 As I discovered when investigating the deaths of Shipman’s patients during Phase One
of the Inquiry, any knowledge of the circumstances of the death is valuable. Information
recorded at the time of the examination by the doctor or other suitably qualified health
professional who confirms the fact of death would be particularly useful to anyone who
might later be responsible for investigating the death. I have in mind information such as
the time and place of death and the identity of any person present at the death or, if the
deceased were alone, of the person who found the body. If someone were present at the
death, a brief account of how the death occurred would be valuable. If the deceased had
been found dead, a note of the position of the body and the way in which the deceased
was clothed would also be helpful. When paramedics are called to a death, they record
some information of this kind. In many cases, however, such information is never
recorded.
5.60 The Brodrick Committee recognised the need for formal certification of the fact of death.
They proposed a combined certificate of fact and cause of death. In my view, a separate
document would be more appropriate. Nowadays, the doctor who knows most about the
deceased’s medical history might well not attend to confirm that death has occurred. As
I have explained in Chapter Four, many doctors use deputising services outside normal
working hours. Many deaths are also confirmed by paramedics.
5.61 In my view, there should be a requirement that the person confirming the fact that death
has occurred should complete a short form providing the type of information I have
suggested. In so saying, I do not suggest that it should be mandatory for a doctor to attend
to certify the fact of death. In my view, a registered nurse or paramedic would be capable
of examining the body, certifying that the deceased is dead and completing the form.
5.62 Not only would such a form assist in the professional scrutiny of the circumstances of
death, it would also form a valuable safeguard against any attempt to provide false
information about the death. Shipman often told lies about the circumstances of death. If
he had had to complete a form such as I have described, and if the deceased’s next of
kin, family member or partner had learned of its contents, there would have been a very
good chance that the falsehoods would have been noticed. Indeed, as I observed in
respect of the requirement to complete a form containing the medical history, Shipman’s
knowledge that he would have to complete a form describing the circumstances of death
would have acted as a significant deterrent.
Shipman’s Manipulation of the System
5.63 Shipman’s ability to certify the cause of death of the patients he had killed, without
objection from anyone, enabled him to pass off the killings as natural deaths. To relatives
or anyone with an interest in the deceased, who might have considered making a report
to the coroner, Shipman would say that he knew the cause of death. Usually, he would give
the relatives a brief explanation and tell them that there was no need to have an autopsy
or report the death to the coroner. If a relative suggested to him that the death seemed
127
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
very sudden and unexpected, his usual reply was to tell the relatives that the death might
have been unexpected to them but it was not unexpected to him. The relatives so trusted
Shipman that they did not question his word.
5.64 There was nobody in authority with the power or knowledge to question the certificate that
Shipman had issued. In the case of all but two of the killings (those of Mrs Renate Overton
and Mr Charles Barlow), the Coroner for the Greater Manchester South District was not
even aware of the death. In a few more (the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy was one), it
appears that Shipman probably spoke informally to a member of the Coroner’s staff and
was ‘permitted’ to issue the MCCD, stating the cause of death he had proposed. I have
no doubt that, in those few cases, Shipman gave the member of staff a highly plausible
account of the death.
5.65 The registrar would rarely have any basis on which to query the issue of an MCCD by
Shipman. The registrar would query the certificate only if there was some fault in its
completion. Shipman was usually very careful to complete MCCDs properly and only
rarely gave a cause of death that was not acceptable to the registrar. Aregistrar might
have felt it appropriate to report a death to the coroner if a relative had told him/her that,
notwithstanding Shipman’s certificate, the family was concerned that the death had been
very sudden and unexpected. Shipman often took precautions to avoid that kind of
occurrence by telling the victim’s family that, if the case were reported to the coroner, it
would mean that there would have to be an autopsy and that this procedure would
probably delay the funeral. Relatives are often reluctant to submit the bodies of their loved
ones to autopsy, if it can be avoided. Often they are anxious to make funeral arrangements
and are worried that an autopsy will cause delay. So it was easy for Shipman to manipulate
their feelings in this way.
Loss of Public Confidence due to Shipman
5.66 The discovery of Shipman’s crimes has resulted in a substantial loss of public confidence
in a system that depends so heavily on the integrity of a single doctor. I consider that, even
if it were to be shown that the present system of death certification by a single practitioner
was working well in most cases, the loss of confidence is such that the public will not be
satisfied unless and until significant change is made. This loss of confidence is a measure
of the damage that Shipman has caused to his former profession. I can well understand
the sense of outrage that honest and conscientious doctors must feel.
Conclusions
5.67 In my view, the present system of death certification requires reform. My first reason for so
saying is that the system is open to abuse by a dishonest doctor. An adequate system of
death certification must provide some effective cross-check upon the account of events
given by the doctor who has treated the deceased and who claims to be able to identify
the cause of death. An account of the same events should be obtained from a family
member or someone with knowledge of the circumstances of the death. Such a crosscheck
is needed, not only to deter a doctor such as Shipman, but also to deter any doctor
128
SHIP03$$17 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 2
who might be tempted to conceal activity less serious than murder, such as an error or
neglect by him/herself or a colleague.
5.68 I have also outlined other aspects of the system that are less than satisfactory. The
Brodrick Committee advocated reform of the system of certification, even though its
members believed that there was no appreciable risk of concealment of homicide or
malpractice. Their perceptions of the shortcomings of the system were similar to mine. My
reasons include the paucity of information gathered on the MCCD, the irrationality of the
‘either/or rule’, the elasticity with which doctors interpret the rules of qualification, the
uncertainty about the standard of confidence required before the doctor should certify the
cause of death and the unsatisfactory practice relating to the reporting of deaths to the
coroner.
5.69 Some of the shortcomings I have outlined in this Chapter might be capable of resolution
if doctors were to be educated in the purposes of death certification and trained how and
when to complete an MCCD. However, in my view, and as the research suggests,
education could not provide an answer to the more fundamental deficiencies.
5.70 I have already said that I have concluded that the present arrangements, whereby, in
effect, doctors take the decision as to whether or not a case should be reported to the
coroner, are not satisfactory. My conclusion is based partly upon the research by Dr Start
and his colleagues, which suggests that, even when making a proper effort to reach the
right decision, doctors fail to do so in an unacceptably high proportion of cases. Afurther
reason for my view is that I am satisfied that some doctors are vulnerable to pressure not
to report a death in circumstances in which they know that they should do so. Later in this
Report, I shall consider whether it would be appropriate for all deaths to be reported to the
coroner service, thereby removing from doctors the decision as to whether or not to report
and also avoiding the need for the compilation and interpretation of a long list of
circumstances in which a death should be reported.
129
SHIP03P005 25-06-03 11:53:30 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: BLANK ProofRound: 2
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER SIX
Registration of Deaths
The Registration Service
6.1 The registration service is organised within 172 local authority areas in England and
Wales. Registrars of births and deaths (‘registrars’)are statutory office-holders who have
no employer and no line manager. Their duties are prescribed by statute and regulations.
They are appointed by the local authority, but may be removed from office only by the
Registrar General, to whom they are accountable for the performance of their statutory
duties. All registrars must appoint at least one deputy. In large urban areas, several fulltime
registrars may be based at one register office, together with deputies, some of whom
work part-time. In sparsely populated rural areas, there may be a part-time registrar and
one deputy, also part-time. In those circumstances, a deputy registrar may work very
infrequently.
6.2 Registrars need no specific qualifications and those entering the service come from a
variety of employment backgrounds. They have no medical expertise; indeed, medical
practitioners are one of the classes of person at present disqualified from holding the
office of registrar. In the past, the General Register Office (GRO), which is the office of the
Registrar General and forms part of the Office for National Statistics (ONS), provided
residential training courses for registrars (but not deputies), covering all aspects of their
work, including death registration. In recent years, however, the policy has changed,
probably for financial reasons. Now, the onus is on the appointing authorities to organise
local training. The GRO will provide assistance with the content of that training. The GRO
also holds seminars and distributes written information, explaining important changes in
registration law and practice. It provides a distance-learning package and produces the
Handbook for Registration Officers, which contains instructions to registrars in carrying
out their functions; the Handbook is up-dated frequently.
6.3 In 1994, the GRO, in collaboration with local authorities, introduced an examination of
registration law and practice, which tests candidates’ knowledge of the law and practice
relating to registration, and includes a practical examination. The examination is not
compulsory. The GRO also carries out periodic inspections of the work of registrars and
register offices.
6.4 Local authorities in some areas (Lincolnshire is one)have developed excellent training
programmes for registrars and deputies. In other areas (for example, Manchester), there
is little or no training provision and very limited opportunity for contact between registrars
working in different register offices. As a consequence, practices within local register
offices vary significantly and registrars can experience a degree of isolation.
6.5 The GRO provides an advice line, offering assistance to registrars who have queries about
registration matters. So far as the registration of deaths is concerned, the majority of
queries relate to the cause of death. A registrar might not understand the cause of death
that appears on the MCCD or might be uncertain as to whether s/he should report the
death to the coroner. Those employees of the General Section of the GRO who deal with
131
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
such queries have no medical qualification or specific training for the task and are reliant
upon medical reference books and notes of past advice that has been received or given.
As I shall explain in due course, these notes are not always helpful. In the event of a
particularly complex medical query, it is open to the staff to seek the advice of medical
epidemiologists employed by the ONS. However, the evidence given to the Inquiry
strongly suggested that most questions are resolved by members of the staff within the
General Section, without recourse to medical advice.
The Registration of a Death
6.6 The Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 governs the registration of deaths. In order
to register a death, the informant must attend personally before the registrar to give
information. The only exception to the requirement for personal attendance before the
registrar arises where an inquest is held. In that event, the coroner provides the particulars
necessary for registration after the inquest has been concluded and no signature in the
register (other than that of the registrar)is required. In other cases, the informant must
attend the register office before the expiration of five days from the date of death or finding
of the body; however, if the informant sends to the registrar written notice of the death,
together with notice from the doctor that the MCCD has been signed within the five-day
period, that period is extended to 14 days.
6.7 The registrar must enter particulars of the death in a register, from which a certified copy
of any entry identified in the index may thereafter be supplied on request, upon payment
of a fee. The Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages Regulations 1968 prescribe the
particulars which must be recorded in the register of deaths: a blank entry can be seen
at Appendix C to this Report. Information about the date and place of death, the name,
occupation, sex and usual address of the deceased and details of the informant must be
recorded. The cause of death must be recorded precisely as it appears on the MCCD or
coroner’s certificate. The name and qualification of the medical practitioner who
completed the MCCD must be entered in the register. The registrar will also ask the
informant a number of questions, the answers to which are not recorded in the register but
are sent to the Registrar General, to be used for statistical purposes.
6.8 If the MCCD appears, on its face, to have been fully and correctly completed and contains
an acceptable cause of death, and if the registrar is not aware of any circumstance
requiring that the death be reported to the coroner, the registrar will proceed to register
the death in reliance upon the MCCD. If the registrar proceeds to registration, the relevant
particulars are entered in the register and signed by the informant. The registrar will then
issue at least one certified copy of the entry in the register (often known as the ‘death
certificate’, although that term is also used, incorrectly, to describe an MCCD)and will
issue a disposal certificate, certifying that the death has been registered. A copy of a blank
disposal certificate can be seen at Appendix C to this Report.
6.9 There are circumstances in which the registrar will have further documentation to
consider, in addition to the MCCD. Before the death comes to the registrar, it may have
been reported to the coroner, probably by the deceased’s treating doctor. If the coroner
has completed his/her enquiries into the death, no post-mortem examination has been
132
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
held and the coroner does not intend to take any further action in connection with the
death, the coroner’s office will usually send to the registrar a Form 100A, signed by the
coroner, confirming that no post-mortem examination has been held and the coroner does
not consider it necessary to hold an inquest. There is no legal requirement on the coroner
to issue a Form 100A and the form is not prescribed by statute. Copies of the form are
supplied by the Registrar General for use by coroners. A blank Form 100A can be seen
at Appendix C of this Report. The cause of the deceased’s death will usually (although not
always)be recorded on Form 100A. However, the instructions on the reverse of the form
direct the registrar to rely on the cause of death that appears on the MCCD when making
the entry in the register of deaths. In practice, the coroner’s staff will usually ensure that the
cause of death on Form 100A is the same as that which appears on the MCCD. However, if
there is inconsistency, it is the information on the MCCD upon which the registrar must rely.
6.10 If the death has been reported to the coroner and s/he has directed a post-mortem
examination and is satisfied, as a result of that examination, that no inquest is necessary,
the coroner’s office will send to the registrar a Form 100B, signed by the coroner,
confirming that the coroner does not consider it necessary to hold an inquest. Under the
provisions of section 19(3)of the Coroners Act 1988, a coroner is required, when satisfied
as a result of a post-mortem examination that an inquest is unnecessary, to send to the
registrar a certificate stating the cause of death as disclosed by the report of the
examination. The form of the certificate is not prescribed by statute and Form 100B is
provided by the Registrar General for this purpose. A blank Form 100B can be seen at
Appendix C of this Report. The instructions on the reverse of the form direct the registrar
to enter the cause of death which appears on Form 100B in the register of deaths. In
practice, it is highly unlikely that the registrar will have received an MCCD in a case where
a post-mortem examination has been undertaken, so that there will be no alternative
source from which the registrar could take the cause of death.
6.11 If the death has been reported to the coroner and an inquest is held, the death cannot be
registered until the conclusion of the inquest. The coroner is then required by section 11(7)
of the Coroners Act 1988 to send to the registrar a certificate giving various details about
the death and the inquest. That certificate must specify the particulars to be registered,
including the cause of death. The form of the certificate is not prescribed by statute and
Form 99 is provided by the Registrar General for this purpose. A blank Form 99 can be
seen at Appendix C of this Report.
The Duty of a Registrar to Report a Death to the Coroner
6.12 In certain circumstances, a registrar will not register the death, but will instead report it to
the coroner. Regulation 41 of the Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987
provides:
‘(1) Where the relevant registrar is informed of the death of any person
he shall ... report the death to the coroner on an approved form if the
death is one:
(a) in respect of which the deceased was not attended during his
last illness by a registered medical practitioner; or
133
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
(b) in respect of which the registrar:
(i) has been unable to obtain a duly completed certificate of
cause of death; or
(ii) has received such a certificate with respect to which it
appears to him, from the particulars contained in the certificate
or otherwise, that the deceased was not seen by the certifying
medical practitioner either after death or within 14 days before
death; or
(c) the cause of which appears to be unknown; or
(d) which the registrar has reason to believe to have been unnatural
or to have been caused by violence or neglect or by abortion or to
have been attended by suspicious circumstances; or
(e) which appears to the registrar to have occurred during an
operation or before recovery from the effect of an anaesthetic; or
(f) which appears to the registrar from the contents of any medical
certificate of cause of death to have been due to industrial disease
or industrial poisoning.’
6.13 In practice, registrars report deaths to the coroner comparatively infrequently. Indeed, in
2001 (the last year for which ONS statistics are available), reports from registrars
accounted for only about 4% of all deaths referred to the coroner. Usually, the attending
doctor will have recognised that the death is one which should be reported and will have
taken the step of reporting the death before the stage of registration has been reached. It
is obviously preferable, where a death must be reported for one of the reasons set out
above, that this is done as soon as possible. This enables the coroner to begin his/her
enquiries earlier than would be the case if the death were reported at the registration
stage, with less delay to the funeral arrangements. In 2001, 95.7% of coroners’ referrals
were made by doctors. There is, as I have said, in Chapter Five, no statutory duty upon
a doctor to make such a referral. However, doctors are encouraged by their professional
associations and by the GRO (in the guidance notes contained in books of MCCDs)to
report to the coroner any death which they judge would need to be referred to the coroner
by the registrar. The remaining referrals to the coroner (less than 1% in 2001)were made
by the police and other agencies.
6.14 In general, if a registrar communicates with the coroner’s office about a death, it is
because one of the following circumstances has arisen:
(a)The doctor completing the MCCD has indicated that s/he has reported ‘this death
to the Coroner for further action’. If that has been done, the registrar cannot
register the death without ensuring that the coroner has completed his/her enquiries
into the death. The coroner will usually give notice that s/he has completed his/her
enquiries and intends to take no further action by issuing a Form 100A: see
paragraph 6.9.
(b)The cause of death (or certain words used to describe the cause of death), as
certified by the doctor, is one which the registrar has been instructed should be
referred to the coroner. This might arise, for example, if the word ‘dehydration’ (which
134
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
might suggest an element of neglect)or ‘fracture’ (which might mean that the death
was due to an accident and, therefore, violent or unnatural)appears within the
causes of death stated. Another example would arise if the registrar took the view that
the cause of death certified amounted to a ‘mode of dying’, rather than a cause of
death.
(c)The informant or another member of the deceased’s family gives the registrar
information that suggests that the death might fall into one of the categories referred
to in regulation 41. The Inquiry was told that this most commonly occurs in the case
of industrial disease; for example, when the deceased dies of a respiratory condition
and the family tells the registrar that s/he was in receipt of a pension relating to
byssinosis contracted when working in the cotton industry. Such cases should result
in an autopsy and inquest.
(d)There is disclosed on the face of the MCCD information that suggests that the death
should have been reported to the coroner by reason of the statutory requirements or
because of a ‘local rule’ operated by the coroner. Regulation 41(1)(b)(ii) requires that
a death must be reported to the coroner, if the certifying doctor did not see the
deceased either after death or within 14 days before the death (the ‘either/or rule’).
However, many coroners have a ‘local rule’ whereby all deaths where the certifying
doctor did not see the deceased during the 14 days before death must be reported,
irrespective of whether the doctor saw the deceased after death. Another common
local rule requires deaths occurring within a certain period (usually 24 hours)after
admission to hospital to be reported.
6.15 Regulation 41 provides for the registrar to report to the coroner deaths within the
categories specified in the regulation on an approved form. The approved form is known
as Form 52; it is not prescribed by statute, but is produced by the Registrar General for
the use of registrars. A blank Form 52 can be seen at Appendix C to this Report.
6.16 In the case of a death which the registrar has reported to the coroner, or which s/he knows
has been notified to the coroner, or which s/he knows it is the duty of some other person
or authority to report to the coroner, the registrar must refrain from registering the death
until s/he has received either a coroner’s certificate after an inquest (Form 99)or a
notification (usually on Form 100A or Form 100B, but sometimes oral)that the coroner
does not intend to hold an inquest. Receipt of such notification enables the registrar to
proceed to register the death.
The Process of Registration
Meeting the Informant
6.17 The registration service rightly lays considerable stress on the need for accurate
information about the deceased. Hitherto, personal attendance by the person likely to
have the best knowledge about the deceased has been seen as the only way to ensure
the accuracy of information. However, changes have been proposed recently which
would make personal attendance optional. I shall refer to those proposed changes later
135
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
in this Chapter. Many registrars consider that a face to face meeting between the registrar
and the informant is helpful to bereaved relatives. They believe that families welcome the
opportunity to take a formal part in the process of registration. Under the present system,
the visit to the register office often constitutes the only contact with ‘the authorities’ during
the post-death procedures and may be welcomed by some as a practical task in which
they can be involved in the aftermath of the death. For others, it must be an inconvenience,
even an ordeal. In many other jurisdictions, personal attendance is not required in order
to register a death. I have the impression that registrars are very considerate of the
bereaved and make every effort to ensure that the process of registration causes as little
distress as possible.
6.18 As I have said in Chapter Five, the doctor usually hands over the MCCD to the informant
or another member of the deceased’s family in a sealed envelope; some doctors do not
tell that person the cause of death before handing over the certificate. Registrars report
that it is quite common for the relatives of the deceased to be unaware of the cause of
death when they present the certificate at the register office. Registrars say that relatives
sometimes bring the MCCD without its envelope or they find that the envelope has been
opened; it appears that the family has looked at the MCCD. The registrar does not
challenge the family about this, unless it appears that the certificate has been tampered
with. However, often, when the envelope has not been opened, the relatives ask to see
the certificate when the registrar has opened it. The registrar allows them to do so and the
relatives are sometimes puzzled, distressed or even angry when they find out the cause
of death that the doctor has given. Registrars often have to try to explain the cause of death
to the deceased’s relatives and are ill equipped to do this. A relative might be distressed
to see that a cause of death such as ‘alcoholism’ appears on the certificate. Sometimes,
the relative will challenge what the doctor has put, asserting that the deceased certainly
did not suffer from the condition to which the doctor has attributed the death. The
registrars say that they try to do what they can to help the relatives in these difficult and
distressing circumstances but feel that this is more than should be expected of them, as
administrators of the system. They consider that the informant should be told of the cause
of death by someone with medical knowledge before registration takes place. Obviously,
it is highly desirable that this should be done by the doctor who completes the MCCD at
the time the certificate is handed over.
Obtaining Information from the Informant
6.19 There is certain information that a registrar must seek from the informant in the course of
their meeting. He or she must obtain the details to be recorded in the register of death and
must seek other information required for statistical purposes. The registrar must also find
out whether the deceased is to be buried or cremated. He or she must find out how many
certified copies of the entry in the register of deaths are required by the informant.
However, there is no requirement for the registrar formally to seek information relating to
the circumstances surrounding the death. Nor is the registrar required to confirm
information given by the doctor who has issued the MCCD. If it appears to the registrar
that there are circumstances that suggest that the death is reportable to the coroner under
the provisions of regulation 41, his/her duty is to make the report. However, the registrar
136
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
is not required to make direct enquiries of the informant, with a view to ascertaining
whether or not such a report is necessary.
6.20 Sometimes, the informant will volunteer information during the course of the meeting (e.g.
about a recent fall suffered by the deceased which might have had a bearing on the death)
that will alert the registrar to the need to report the death. Sometimes also, in the course
of general conversation, it will become evident that there are differences between the facts
as stated by the doctor on the MCCD and as given by the informant. In those cases, the
registrar might make further enquiries or might report the death to the coroner.
6.21 There appears to be some confusion among registrars about the ambit of the questions
that the registrar is required to ask the informant. One witness, a deputy registrar, stated
in her Inquiry statement that it was a requirement of the registration process to ask the
informant when the doctor last saw the deceased. It is clear from the evidence of
Miss Ceinwen Lloyd, Branch Manager Births and Deaths Registration at the GRO, that this
is not in fact the case. At a register office that I visited personally, for the purpose of seeing
registrars at work, some registrars believed that it was obligatory for them to ask an
informant whether the deceased had suffered any fall or other accident prior to death.
They always did so. One of their colleagues, however, said that he never asked this
question. He was unaware of any requirement that he should do so and Miss Lloyd’s
evidence makes it clear that no such requirement in fact exists. Within the Tameside
register office, it is clear from the evidence that different registrars had differing practices
in relation to the questions asked of informants.
The Registrar’s Duty to Scrutinise the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death
Has the Correct Form Been Used?
6.22 The registrar must first check that the correct form has been used; there are separate
forms for neonatal deaths and stillbirths. Then, s/he must scrutinise the MCCD to ascertain
whether it appears to be ‘valid’ and ‘acceptable’.
Is the Doctor Qualified?
6.23 The first stage is to ascertain that the form has been signed by a doctor who was qualified
to sign it. If the form is not signed, or the doctor who has signed it was not qualified to do
so, the MCCD is invalid. There are two necessary ingredients to qualification. First, the
signatory must be a registered medical practitioner. Usually, this is easy to check. The
registrar becomes familiar with the names and the writing of the doctors working in the
district, although there will be a twice-yearly influx of new house officers at hospitals. The
task of the registrar would be made easier if the doctor were required to print his/her name
and to add his/her General Medical Council registration number.
6.24 Second, the doctor must have attended the deceased during the last illness. As I have
said in Chapter Five, the meaning of this phrase is not defined. The certifying doctor states
in the declaration contained on the MCCD that s/he was in medical attendance during the
deceased’s last illness. When considering whether the doctor is qualified in this respect,
137
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
the registrar is wholly dependent on the doctor’s assertion. The registrars who gave
evidence to the Inquiry said that they did not understand it to be their task to ask the
informant questions designed to check the truth of statements made by the certifying
doctor. If, however, the informant, or anyone accompanying the informant, were to
volunteer information that cast doubt on an assertion made by the doctor (as, for example,
by remarking that the deceased had not seen a doctor for months), the registrar should
heed that and should report the death to the coroner.
Application of the ‘Either/Or Rule’
6.25 If the registrar is satisfied that the certificate is ‘valid’, s/he must then consider whether it
is ‘acceptable’. The registrar will check to see if the doctor has recorded that s/he saw the
deceased within 14 days before death or has seen the body after death. The registrar is
not required to check with the informant when the certifying doctor last saw the deceased.
In this, as in other matters, the registrar is dependent on the word of the doctor. If the
doctor has stated that s/he has seen the deceased’s body after death but had not seen
the deceased for, say, several months before death, the registrar may wonder whether the
doctor is sufficiently certain of the cause of death. There is no official guidance available
to a registrar on this issue.
The ‘Spearing Box’
6.26 Next, the registrar will look at the ‘Spearing box’ where the doctor should state whether
s/he has any reason to believe that the death was or might have been caused by the
employment followed at some time by the deceased. When that box has been ticked, the
death must be reported to the coroner, if that has not already been done. Several
registrars told the Inquiry that doctors frequently fail to tick this box when it would obviously
have been appropriate for them to do so. As the registrar has to ask the informant about
the deceased’s former occupation, there is an opportunity to discover whether the death
might have resulted from exposure to an industrial hazard. Questions about pensions may
also lead to relevant information being given. Mr Christopher Dorries and Mr John Pollard,
HM Coroners for South Yorkshire (West)and Greater Manchester South respectively, said
that, in their experience, the most common reason for a registrar to report a death to the
coroner was the discovery of a possible connection between the deceased’s former
occupation and the cause of death. Some registrars, on seeing a death from lung disease
(particularly lung cancer)make a practice of asking questions designed to discover
whether the death might have been occupational in origin. However, it does not seem that
the practice is universal.
Scrutiny of the Cause of Death
6.27 The registrar will then examine the cause of death. It is this process which gives rise to
the registrar’s main difficulty. Registrars have no medical training. Some registrars told the
Inquiry that they felt ill equipped to undertake this task and thought that it should be
undertaken by someone with a medical qualification.
138
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
6.28 Various difficulties arise. Sometimes, the problem is only that the doctor’s writing is
difficult to read. Sometimes, the registrar is not familiar with, and does not understand,
the medical terminology used in stating the cause of death. Not having any medical
training, the registrar is seeking to ‘recognise’ the terms used by the doctor to describe
the cause of death, but will frequently not understand them. Experienced registrars
become familiar with the most common causes of death but, from time to time, the
registrar is faced with a cause of death of which s/he has never heard. It has not been
thought practicable to provide registrars with a list of acceptable causes of death. I can
understand why. The list of possibilities would be almost endless. If in difficulty, the
registrar might telephone the doctor to ask what the cause of death means. But s/he
might hesitate to do so for a variety of reasons. In any event, s/he cannot assess the
validity or reliability of the answer. Alternatively, the registrar might telephone the GRO
advice line. Depending on the experience of the individuals concerned, a member of
the GRO staff might have a wider knowledge of medical terminology than the registrar.
However, like the registrars, the GRO staff are not medically qualified. The evidence
strongly suggests that they do not often refer queries from registrars to one of the
medical epidemiologists employed by the ONS. This situation is not satisfactory and it
would be manifestly better for the scrutiny of the cause of death to be carried out by
someone who understands the terminology employed and has immediate access to
medical expertise, if required.
6.29 The GRO issues guidance to registrars about causes of death that, if they appear on
the MCCD, should be reported to the coroner. For example, the Handbook for
Registration Officers states that tetanus is almost always the result of an injury and, when
it appears on the MCCD, should be reported. Registrars are also advised that blood
poisoning and septicaemia should be reported if they appear alone on the MCCD and
if they appear in association with an injury. The Handbook also advises that modes of
dying do not, on their own, positively identify a cause of death. If all the information
recorded in Part I of the cause of death takes the form of a mode of dying, rather than
a cause of death, the death should be regarded as one where the cause is not known
and should be reported to the coroner. Examples of statements implying a mode of
dying include ‘respiratory arrest’, ‘respiratory failure’, ‘cardiac arrest’ and similar
expressions. If, however, the mode of dying is supported by a cause of death that would
not of itself be reportable, that is acceptable. For example, ‘cardiac arrest’ in Part I(a),
without more, would not be acceptable. However, if the immediate cause were given
as I(a)cardiac arrest due to I(b)myocardial infarction and I(c)ischaemic heart disease,
the MCCD would be acceptable. Sometimes, a doctor will place the diseases or
conditions causing death in the wrong order, for example with the immediate cause at
I(c)instead of at I(a). An experienced registrar will learn to recognise this and will see
that the certificate does not make ‘medical sense’.
6.30 Since 1985, ‘old age’ has been acceptable to the registration service as the sole cause of
death, provided that the deceased was aged 70 or over. The Inquiry was told that the
decision to accept ‘old age’ was made because it was thought that conditions such as
‘bronchopneumonia’ were being used by certifying doctors in order to avoid referrals to
the coroner in cases where frail and elderly persons died without having any specific
139
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
disease diagnosed or treated. Until 1996, the guidance to certifying doctors about the use
of ‘old age’ was as follows:
‘In some elderly persons, there may be no specific condition identified
as the patient gradually fails. If such circumstances gradually lead to
deterioration and ultimate death, ‘old age’ or ‘senility’ is perfectly
acceptable as the sole cause of death for persons aged 70 and over.’
6.31 This guidance is closer to, although not as stringent as, the criteria which Dr John
Grenville, a general practitioner, advised the Inquiry should be applied before a doctor
could properly certify a death as being due to ‘old age’. In his oral evidence, given during
Phase One of the Inquiry, Dr Grenville said:
‘It [old age] is an appropriate thing to put where an elderly patient has
been suffering for some time with generalised degenerative disease
involving several organs, the elderly patient has been ill for a significant
period of time, usually weeks or months, with multiple organ failure and
the death is fully expected. It may be difficult in those circumstances to
determine exactly which organ it was that ultimately failed and brought
about the death. So, in that situation, the diagnosis of old age or senility
is acceptable.’
6.32 The description given by Dr Grenville amounts, in effect, to a positive diagnosis of ‘old age’
as the cause of death, not merely a default cause to be used in the absence of any other
possibility.
6.33 In 1996, the guidance to certifying doctors was amended under the supervision of the
Deputy Chief Medical Statistician and the ONS Death Certification Supervisory Group to
state:
‘... do ‘not’ use ‘old age’ or ‘senility’ as the only cause of death in Part I
unless a more specific cause of death cannot be given and the deceased
was aged 70 or over’.
6.34 The references to gradual failure and deterioration, which appeared in the earlier
guidance, were not reproduced in the later version. In my view, the effect of the more
recent guidance is this. If a doctor does not know the cause of a patient’s death but is
confident that the death was natural, s/he can certify that the death was due to ‘old age’,
provided that the patient was 70 or over. The average life expectancy in England and
Wales is now about 75 years for men and 80 for women. About two-thirds of male deaths
and four-fifths of female deaths occur at age 70 or over. There is, therefore, a general
feeling that 70 is very young to be certified as having died of ‘old age’. The ONS shares
this view. Its response to the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper said that the reason the age limit
was not changed when the guidance was last up-dated was that ‘it was considered
impractical to ensure that a revised age limit would be made widely known’. Not
surprisingly, some registrars are unhappy about the use of ‘old age’ as the sole cause of
death, fearing that it may be a cover for the fact that the doctor does not really know the
cause of death.
140
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
6.35 In practice, however, if a doctor certifies the death as being due to ‘old age’ and if the
deceased person is 70 or over, the registrar is virtually bound to accept the MCCD. The
deceased’s age is the only objective measure of the acceptability of ‘old age’ available to
the registrar. He or she will in general have no information about any other medical
condition(s)from which the deceased might have suffered and which might have caused
the death. The registrar is left to rely on the doctor’s integrity and judgement as to whether
‘old age’ is appropriate in the particular case. The registrar is not required to ask questions
designed to check on the validity of a cause of death given by a doctor. In practice, it
appears that some registrars do ask such questions and, if they discover anything that
suggests to them that ‘old age’ is not appropriate (e.g. that the deceased person was
suffering from other conditions which might have caused the death), they will refer the
death to the coroner. However, it is clear from the evidence given to the Inquiry that many
registrars feel that such enquiries fall beyond their remit. One registrar told the Inquiry that,
if the family told her that the deceased person had been up and about the week before
being certified as dying of ‘old age’, she would not report the death to the coroner. She
would advise the relatives to speak to the doctor if they had concerns and would then
proceed to register the death. So far as she was concerned, she would have a viable
MCCD with no reason to delay registration.
6.36 It is clear that, where a doctor gives ‘old age’ as the only cause of death in a person of 70
or over, the death is likely to be registered, and a disposal certificate issued, without any
enquiry as to whether the deceased suffered the kind of gradual deterioration and decline
that would warrant a diagnosis that death was caused by ‘old age’.
Reports to the Coroner
The Incidence of Reporting by Registrars
6.37 Although the registrar is under a duty to report to the coroner any death falling within the
provisions of regulation 41, the number of cases in which a registrar makes a report is in
fact limited. Most reportable cases have already been reported to the coroner by a doctor
before they reach the registrar. Cases reported by a doctor will not usually come to the
registrar until the coroner has considered the matter and issued a Form 100A, a Form
100B or a Form 99.
6.38 Another reason why the registrar makes very few reports to the coroner is that s/he has
only a very limited opportunity to learn information that might result in the realisation that
the death is reportable. As I have said, the registrars told me that they are not required
to ask questions about the circumstances of the death. Both Mr Dorries and Mr Michael
Burgess (HM Coroner for Surrey), believe that registrars do ask probing questions.
Another coroner who provided evidence to the Inquiry spoke of families being questioned
by the registrar, apparently with a view to eliciting any concerns they may have about the
death. It may be that there is some misunderstanding of the extent of the registrars’ role.
It may be that practice varies from place to place. However, I have the impression that, in
general, very few questions are asked by registrars, other than those directly required by
the process of registration. It is a remarkable anomaly within the present system that the
only person who is under a statutory duty to report a death to the coroner (except for those
141
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
with a responsibility for persons who die in custody, to whom special requirements apply)
has so little opportunity to investigate its circumstances and no training to equip him/her
to do so.
Formal Reports
6.39 As I have said, regulation 41 requires a registrar to report deaths to the coroner on an
approved form. That form is Form 52. An example of the form appears at Appendix C. The
form requires the registrar to record the date and place of death, some details about the
deceased, the cause of death (as given on the MCCD), the name of the certifying medical
practitioner and the reason for reporting the death. Having completed and despatched
the form, the registrar retains the counterfoil, on which s/he should record the date and
place of death, the deceased’s details, the cause of death, the name of the coroner to
whom the death was reported and the date when it was reported. There is also space to
record the date when the registrar received one of the various forms (e.g. Forms 100A,
100B or 99), advising him/her of the result of the coroner’s enquiries.
6.40 Mrs Jane West, registrar for the Boston district and Training Officer for the Lincolnshire
registration service, explained that there were a number of advantages in using Form 52
when making a report to the coroner. First, the counterfoil provides a written record of the
report which the registrar can retain. This would be valuable in the event that any question
were raised in the future about the registration of the death, or the validity of the MCCD
upon which the registration was based.
6.41 Second, Mrs West said that receipt of a Form 52 means that the coroner’s office has to
respond to the report in some way, even if it is only to inform the registrar that no further
action is to be taken and no form (i.e. no Form 100A or Form 100B)will be issued. When
a registrar reports a death to the coroner, s/he expects to receive one of those forms,
indicating that, after considering the death (and in the case of Form 100B holding an
autopsy), the coroner has decided that no inquest is necessary. Alternatively, s/he would
expect to receive a Form 99, signifying that an inquest has been held. The forms provide
confirmation that the coroner’s investigation has been completed and that the registrar is
at liberty to register. The coroner has a legal obligation to send to the registrar Form 100B
and Form 99 in the appropriate circumstances. However, no such duty exists in relation
to Form 100A. Most coroners recognise the uncertainty in which the registrar is placed if
s/he receives no documentation relating to a reported death and no notification of what
decision has been taken in relation to the death. Such coroners, if they do not intend to
order an autopsy, will send a Form 100A. However, Miss Lloyd told the Inquiry that she was
aware that there were coroners who would never issue a Form 100A on the basis that they
have no statutory duty to do so. She reported that this was less of a problem than it had
been in the past, since there appeared to be a growing awareness that this type of
inflexibility was inappropriate.
6.42 The third potential advantage of the Form 52 is that, if there are several conditions
specified in the cause of death at Part I(a), (b) and (c) and Part II, it can be easier to
understand them if they are seen in writing, in the order they appear on the MCCD, rather
than relayed over the telephone. Mrs West’s personal practice is to photocopy the MCCD
142
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
and send it to the coroner with Form 52. She always uses Form 52 when reporting a death
to the coroner. Some coroners insist that Form 52 be used whenever a registrar reports a
death to them. Mr Dorries does not require a Form 52 in all cases, but requests registrars
to send him a copy of the MCCD. If the MCCD has been poorly completed, that enables
him to take up the matter with the doctor concerned or, if the certifier is a hospital doctor,
with one of his/her seniors. Miss Lloyd told the Inquiry that there were districts where the
coroner makes it clear to registrars that s/he prefers telephone referrals and does not
welcome reports by way of Form 52. Mrs West observed that that had been the case in her
district in the past. However, the registrars insisted on reporting deaths by means of the
correct procedure and that has now been accepted by the coroner’s office.
Informal Reports
6.43 In some areas, however, registrars do not habitually use Form 52 when making a report to
the coroner. Mr John Pollard told the Inquiry that, during 2001, his office had received a
total of only 14 reports of deaths referred by way of Form 52 by registrars at the three
register offices in his district. He was not able to say what proportion of the total deaths
reported to him was reported by registrars. He could only say that it was a very small
proportion. However, the evidence available to the Inquiry would suggest that the total
number of deaths reported in a year by registrars at the three register offices would be
significantly more than 14. Mr Burgess said that he received very few Forms 52. He
estimated that he receives less than one a week from four register offices. He assumed
that registrars preferred to use the telephone. Before attending to give evidence to the
Inquiry, Mrs West carried out a survey of the Forms 52 issued by her. For some years, they
have averaged one a month. It may be that, as well as adopting the practice of making all
reports by means of Form 52, Mrs West is also more ready to report deaths to the coroner
than are the registrars in South Manchester. There was also evidence that the frequency
with which registrars report by using Form 52 has increased recently. The Tameside
registrars have now adopted the practice of making all their reports to the coroner by
means of a Form 52.
6.44 The fact that some registrars have not in the past habitually used Form 52 when making a
report to the coroner may be because of the preference of staff at the coroner’s office. It
may be because the registrars themselves prefer to adopt the less formal procedure of
telephoning the coroner’s office to report a death. The perceived justification for this
informality is speed. If the need to report a case to the coroner arises during the
registration process, the informant (and, possibly, other members of the deceased’s
family)is already at the register office. Registrars are naturally anxious to avoid any delay
in the registration process. They do not wish to distress or inconvenience the bereaved
family. This is understandable and commendable. However, the effects of this informality
are often undesirable and result in further loss of rigour in a system that is not inherently
very rigorous. In any event, no time (save the very few minutes required to complete Form
52)need be lost in sending a Form 52 to the coroner’s office. Mrs West’s practice is to fax
a copy to the coroner’s office immediately and follow it up with a paper copy afterwards. A
Form 52 could also be sent electronically, provided the necessary technology is available.
143
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
6.45 A registrar who telephones the coroner’s office, saying that the MCCD which has been
presented to him/her is or might not be acceptable, will sometimes be told by the coroner’s
officer that the coroner will not take over the case and will not issue a Form 100A. In that
event, the registrar has little option but to proceed to register the death. Sometimes,
registrars are made to feel that they are making a fuss about nothing. The outcome seems
to depend on who is the stronger personality, the registrar or the coroner’s officer. Such
a conversation might well go unrecorded; it is likely to be treated as an informal request
for ‘advice’. If a more formal method of reporting were adopted, such informal
conversations would not take place. Then if, as sometimes happens, the coroner (or the
coroner’s officer on his/her behalf)declines to accept jurisdiction, leaving the registrar no
option but to accept the MCCD and register the death, at least there would have to be a
record of the decision.
Conclusions
6.46 The registrar’s role is essentially administrative. He or she is required to record details of
births, marriages and deaths. The information recorded by registrars forms the basis of an
important public record and is widely used for statistical and research purposes. It is vital
that it is recorded meticulously and accurately. The main function of registrars is to ensure
that that is done. Most of the information with which they are concerned is taken from
members of the family affected by the registration concerned. Registrars also have the
task of guiding members of the public through the formalities associated with the most
important of all life events.
6.47 In the case of the registration of a death, registrars are also required to carry out a function
of a completely different nature. They have to scrutinise a certificate written by a doctor
and assess, insofar as they are able, whether it provides an acceptable medical
explanation for the death. They have to be alert to circumstances that might be mentioned
in, or evident from, the MCCD and which might make a report to the coroner appropriate.
They have to do this with no background of medical knowledge, no training in the skills
needed to question members of the public so as to elicit the correct information and no
clear direction as to whether they should be doing this or not. All the while, they are
conscious of their lack of medical knowledge and of the consequent difficulty of
questioning the judgement of the certifying doctor.
6.48 My main concern is that registrars are not trained or equipped to provide the only form of
scrutiny applied to MCCDs issued by medical practitioners. Unless they are encouraged
to question the informant about the circumstances of the death, they cannot form any view
as to whether the death ought to be reported to the coroner. Even if they do ask relevant
questions (as, I believe, some do), they have not been trained in the enquiries which they
should make. Nor are they in a position properly to evaluate the replies that they receive.
Without medical expertise, they cannot effectively consider the cause of death given by
the doctor. This is a not a criticism of the registrars, but of the system that imposes a
statutory duty upon them, while not equipping them to fulfil it. In future, any information
about cause of death provided by a doctor should be scrutinised by a person with a
medical qualification, or at least someone with special training in medical matters and
ready access to expert medical advice. That person should also have the opportunity to
144
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
cross-check the essential facts with a relative of the deceased or someone with
knowledge of the circumstances of the death. In my view, the task of scrutinising the cause
of death should no longer be that of the registrars. Theirs should be a purely administrative
function.
6.49 One of the real problems created by the present arrangements is that the registrar is put
in the position of having to make a ‘snap’ judgement. He or she sees the MCCD only when
the informant arrives at the office. There is no opportunity to reflect on it. The informant
expects to be able to register the death. The registrar is then under pressure, knowing that
any delay will cause distress. The fact that the MCCD contains very little information
means that the family may well give some additional, unexpected information in the course
of a registration. That may cause a problem that the registrar will have to attempt to resolve
there and then. If the person assessing the validity and acceptability of the certificate were
able to consider its contents in advance of the face to face meeting, with the benefit of a
great deal more information and medical advice on hand, there would be far greater
opportunity to make a considered judgement. Moreover, the family could be prepared for
any problems that might arise. Any such problems could then be resolved without the
extreme pressure of time that characterises the present arrangements.
6.50 In the course of the Stage Two hearings, the Inquiry heard a considerable amount of
evidence about practice at the Tameside register office. This was necessary, because it
was there that the deaths of virtually all Shipman’s patients were registered. The evidence
showed that there were some practices in force at the Tameside register office that
contrasted unfavourably with those operated, for example, in register offices in
Lincolnshire, about which Mrs West gave evidence. I shall discuss those practices in
Chapter Fourteen of this Report. Recent correspondence from the GRO has confirmed
what I had believed to be the case, namely that the departures from best practice about
which the Inquiry has heard are not confined to Tameside. Indeed, such is the concern of
officials at the GRO about variations in practice throughout the country that, following a
meeting with Home Office officials, they have written to all registrars and coroners, giving
guidance about good practice in relation to a number of matters (including the need to use
Form 52 whenever a report to the coroner is made)that have been explored in the course
of evidence given to the Inquiry.
6.51 It is not surprising that variations in practice in different areas have grown up over the
years. The uneven training provision and the relative isolation in which some registrars
work make such variations virtually inevitable. Furthermore, as I shall discuss in due
course, practice within coroners’ offices is similarly variable, for similar reasons. The
differing relationships between staff at local register offices and coroner’s offices must
also be a factor that has encouraged variations in practice to develop and flourish.
Future Changes to the Registration Process
6.52 In January 2002, following public consultation, the Government published a White Paper
entitled ‘Civil Registration: Vital Change. Birth Marriage and Death Registration in the 21st
Century’. The document contains a number of important proposals for change.
145
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
6.53 It is proposed that responsibility for registration should be transferred entirely to local
authorities. Registration officers would become employees of local authorities. Local
authorities would have responsibility for their training, although the Registrar General
would continue to provide some technical training, mainly via computer assisted learning,
as at present. Services would be tailored to meet local needs.
6.54 It is also proposed that individuals would be able, on production of the appropriate
evidence of identity, to register deaths remotely via the Internet or by telephone. There is
no proposal at present to remove the option of registering in person. The document
suggests that:
‘... the giving of information to the registrar about a death is much more
than a legal duty. It forms an integral part of the grieving process. A
registrar is perceived as the person who can provide advice,
reassurance and information at a time of great sadness.’
However, it seems inevitable that the number of face to face registrations will reduce over
time with the introduction of the new arrangements.
6.55 The facility for remote registration of deaths will be dependent on the introduction of
electronic data exchange between doctors, coroners and registrars. This will enable
information about cause of death, coroner’s certificates and other documents to be
transmitted electronically. Although the development and installation of the information
technology necessary to put the proposals into practice will take some time, it seems likely
that, within a few years, the system of registration of deaths in England and Wales will be
very different from that which it is now. It may well be that, in time, the practice of personal
attendance by the deceased’s family to register a death will disappear altogether.
6.56 In the long term, it is proposed that death information will be capable of being viewed
electronically, thus removing the need for a paper death certificate. The record of death
registration would form part of a ‘through life’ record, which would link records of births,
marriages and deaths. Access to ‘through life’ records would be restricted.
6.57 Historic records, i.e. those more than a hundred years old, would be open and fully
available to the public. In the case of records less than a hundred years old, information
such as addresses, occupations and cause of death would be treated as confidential and
would not be released into the public domain. Access to such information would be
available only to the deceased’s family, those who were granted permission by the family
and those agencies having legally prescribed access. There would be an additional form
of death certificate, which would be acceptable for most administrative purposes. Such a
certificate would omit the cause of death.
6.58 The document does not explain how, when dealing with remote registration, registrars
would comply with their duty to report certain categories of death to the coroner. If
regulation 41 were to remain in force, they would presumably continue to make such
reports if there appeared reason to do so from the contents of the MCCD and any other
information provided by the informant. In reality, however, their opportunity to identify the
circumstances making a death reportable would be limited. I have already described the
difficulties that registrars have in identifying those deaths that should be reported to the
146
SHIP03$$18 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
coroner under the current system. The proposals for change, with the consequent advent
of on-line and telephone registration, would compound those difficulties. This confirms my
view that registrars should be relieved of their duties under regulation 41. In the future,
their function in relation to the registration of deaths, as with other aspects of their work,
should be purely administrative.
147
SHIP03P006 08-06-03 09:25:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER SEVEN
Coroners and Their Jurisdiction
Status, Appointment, Removal and Conditions of Service
7.1 Coroners are independent judicial officers, answerable only to the Crown. Responsibility
for appointing a coroner lies with the local authority for the district over which the coroner
has jurisdiction, subject to notification being given to (or, in some cases, approval being
given by) the Home Office. The local authority also has responsibility for remunerating the
coroner and for funding the running of his/her office and the conduct of his/her inquests.
Each district has a deputy coroner and some have one or more assistant deputy coroners.
7.2 The Lord Chancellor has power to remove a coroner from office for inability or
misbehaviour in the discharge of his/her duty. As I have already mentioned in Chapter
Two, the Lord Chancellor also has power (with the concurrence of the Home Secretary)
to make rules governing the practice and procedures relating to inquests and autopsies.
However, the Lord Chancellor’s Department (LCD), which has responsibility for the
judicial system, plays no part in the appointment of coroners, in their training and
continuing education, or in the running of coroners’ offices or courts.
7.3 The Department which provides the point of contact between coroners and central
government is the Home Office, through the Coroners Section of its Animal Procedures
and Coroners Unit.
7.4 The minimum qualification for the offices of coroner, deputy and assistant deputy coroner
is five years’ qualification as a solicitor, barrister or medical practitioner. The Inquiry heard
that coroners’ appointments are now generally made after an open competition. However,
there still appear to be some areas where the tradition is that the office passes from partner
to partner within a single solicitors’ practice. Mr Michael Burgess, Honorary Secretary of
the Coroners’ Society of England and Wales (‘the Coroners’ Society’) and HM Coroner for
Surrey, explained that many local authorities are reluctant to appoint anyone as a coroner
who has not already had experience of coronial work. Under section 6 of the Coroners Act
1988, a coroner is required to appoint as his/her deputy a person approved by the
chairman of the relevant local authority. He or she may appoint as assistant deputy a
person who has been similarly approved. In practice, provided that the coroner proposes
for appointment somebody suitably qualified, his/her choice is likely to be approved. In
effect, therefore, the coroner can select his/her deputy and assistant deputies. As these
are likely to be the only persons who will ever gain experience of coronial work, and are
likely therefore to be the strongest candidates for appointment as coroner in the future, it
would seem that, to a large extent, coroners are still a self-perpetuating group. I do not
think that such a system is consistent with the principle of equal opportunity. Also, the
effect of the system is that the position of coroner may not always be held by the most
suitably qualified person.
7.5 Some coroners have reciprocal arrangements with neighbouring coroners by which each
acts as the other’s deputy or assistant deputy. By way of example, Mr John Pollard, HM
Coroner for Greater Manchester South District, was formerly a partner in a solicitors’
149
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
practice and was appointed Deputy Coroner for Cheshire by the senior partner of the
practice, who was then Coroner for Cheshire. Mr Pollard’s appointment took place as soon
as he had attained the minimum period of five years’ qualification as a solicitor. Thirteen
years later, he was appointed Coroner for Greater Manchester South District. Mr Pollard’s
former partner (who still occupied the position of Coroner for Cheshire) then became
Deputy Coroner for Greater Manchester South District. That arrangement continued until
recently, when it was adjusted so that the present Coroner for Cheshire (appointed
following the death of Mr Pollard’s former partner) and Mr Pollard became Assistant
Deputy Coroners for each other’s districts and new Deputy Coroners were appointed.
7.6 As at February 2003, according to the Home Office, there were 129 coroner’s districts in
England and Wales and 115 coroners, of whom 23 were full-time. The Home Office has
told the Inquiry that only nine or ten coroners (as opposed to deputy or assistant deputy
coroners) are medically qualified. Two of those hold both a legal and medical qualification.
Full-time coroners are paid an annual salary on a scale according to the population of
their district.
7.7 Expenses in connection with the holding of inquests and the conduct of autopsies are met
by the local authority. None of the coroners who gave oral evidence to the Inquiry reported
any problems in persuading their local authorities to fund their activities. The Inquiry
understands that financial constraints may be more of an issue in smaller districts served
by part-time coroners.
7.8 The quality of facilities available to coroners varies widely. Mr Christopher Dorries, HM
Coroner for South Yorkshire (West), has his main office at the Medico-Legal Centre in
Sheffield. The lower floor houses the city’s public mortuary. The office of Mr Dorries and
his staff, together with a dedicated court room, is on the upper floor. Also situated on the
upper floor is the University of Sheffield Department of Forensic Pathology, with a staff of
four forensic pathologists (including two professors), a professor of toxicology and a
forensic anthropologist. Thus, Mr Dorries has both ready access to medical advice and
the benefit of having many of the autopsies which he orders carried out on the premises
by specialist forensic pathologists. His staff of two coroner’s officers (both serving police
officers) and the equivalent of a full-time administrative assistant and a full-time secretary
work from the main office in Sheffield; another coroner’s officer is employed at a small
office in a police station in Barnsley.
7.9 By contrast, the Inquiry has been told about another full-time coroner who works from
home with, apparently, no secretarial assistance or access to fax machines or computer.
Mr Burgess, also full-time, described how he works sometimes from his home, sometimes
from the premises of the solicitors’ practice in which he was previously a partner and, at
other times, from a retiring room (equipped with a computer and telephone) at one of the
courts at which he holds inquests. He has no clerical support; if an acute need arises, it
is met by using clerical staff from his former practice.
7.10 The arrangements for the provision of staff to support the coroner in his/her work vary
considerably from district to district. Traditionally, the coroner was supported by coroner’s
officers who were serving police officers. Today, most coroners have civilian coroner’s
150
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
officers, but also rely to some extent on serving police officers and administrative staff. I
shall describe these arrangements more fully in Chapter Eight.
Part-Time Coroners
7.11 As I have said already, according to the Home Office, there are 23 full-time coroners in
England and Wales. The remainder are part-time and may continue to pursue their legal
or medical practice when not engaged on coronial duties. Part-time coroners are paid
according to the number of deaths they deal with over a given period. The terms vary.
Some authorities pay on the basis of the number of cases which are formally reported to
the coroner and in respect of which s/he accepts jurisdiction; others pay on the basis of
the number of cases reported to the coroner, whether formally or informally. It is not
uncommon for part-time coroners who practise as solicitors to discharge their coroner’s
duties from their practice premises, with secretarial and administrative assistance from
practice staff. Others carry out their duties from home.
7.12 Most part-time coroners are solicitors in private practice. I am unsure to what extent there
is recognition of the potential problems of conflict of interest and loss of independence
inherent in these arrangements, but the potential undoubtedly exists. Take, for example,
the position of a part-time coroner who is investigating the death of the driver of a motor
vehicle involved in a road traffic accident. If the coroner’s partner were instructed by the
widow of the deceased to bring a claim for damages against the driver of the other vehicle
involved, the coroner could face a conflict of interest. As a partner in the firm, s/he might
well have an interest in the successful conclusion of the widow’s action. Alternatively, one
might consider the position of the part-time coroner who is also a partner in a solicitors’
firm with a criminal practice. It would be quite possible for his/her firm to be dealing with
a murder that is also being dealt with in the coroner’s office.
7.13 The problem is exacerbated by the lack of facilities provided by local authorities. As I have
said, it is not uncommon for a coroner to work from the premises of his/her legal practice.
As I understand it, coroners use such premises, not from choice, but because the local
authority has failed to provide an office from which to conduct the business of the coroner.
In my opinion, the use of the premises of a private legal practice for the work of a part-time
coroner is most undesirable. The coroner should be, and should be seen to be,
independent of legal practitioners within the district.
DeputyCoroners
7.14 A coroner is required to hold him/herself ready at all times to undertake by him/herself or
his/her deputy or assistant deputy any duties in connection with inquests and autopsies.
Section 7 of the Coroners Act 1988 provides that deputy coroners may lawfully act for their
coroners only in limited circumstances, namely when the coroner is ill, absent for some
lawful or reasonable cause or disqualified for some reason from sitting on a particular
inquest. Construed strictly, the limitations mean that, if a coroner is engaged, for example,
on a substantial inquest within his/her district (so that s/he is not ‘absent’), his/her deputy
cannot be used to carry out other duties which require attention. Some coroners, however,
consider that, if they are engaged on their duties in one part of their district, they are
151
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
lawfully ‘absent’ from other areas and can therefore use their deputies to assist in carrying
out necessary work in those areas. Assistant deputies can exercise the same functions as
a deputy coroner, but only if the deputy coroner is ill or absent for some lawful or
reasonable cause or disqualified from sitting on an inquest.
The Basis of the Coroner’s Jurisdiction
7.15 A coroner can act only if and when a death is reported to him/her. In 2001, 37.8% of all
registered deaths were reported to coroners. Doctors are responsible for reporting most
deaths (95.7% in 2001), with the police and other agencies reporting less than 1%.
Registrars account for about 4% of reported deaths. Coroners receive no information
about (and cannot therefore take any steps in connection with) deaths that are not
reported to them.
7.16 The jurisdiction of the coroner is based in statute. The current legislation governing the
coronial system consists of the Coroners Act 1988 (which is largely a consolidation of
previous Coroners Acts) and the Coroners Rules 1984.
Section 8 of the Coroners Act 1988
7.17 Section 8 of the Coroners Act 1988 provides that:
‘(1) Where a coroner is informed that the bodyof a person (‘‘the
deceased’’) is lying within his district and there is reasonable cause to
suspect that the deceased –
(a) has died a violent or an unnatural death;
(b) has died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown; or
(c) has died in prison or in such a place or in such circumstances
as to require an inquest under anyother Act,
then, whether the cause of death arose within his district or not, the
coroner shall as soon as practicable hold an inquest into the death of the
deceased ...’.
7.18 There is no statutory definition of the words ‘violent’, ‘unnatural’, or ‘sudden’. I shall deal
later in this Chapter with the problems that arise in understanding and applying these
terms.
7.19 Section 8, therefore, requires the coroner to make a decision as to whether the reported
death falls within the ambit of the section, i.e. whether there is reasonable cause to suspect
that the death was violent or unnatural, or sudden and of cause unknown or that it occurred
in prison. It follows that the coroner might decide that the circumstances of the death
demand an inquest, even though the cause of death is clear. The death of a motorcyclist
suffering fatal head injuries in a road traffic accident would be an obvious example. There
would plainly be reasonable cause to suspect that the death was violent. There would also
be reasonable cause to suspect that it had not been caused by a natural disease process
and was therefore ‘unnatural’. On either of those two grounds, therefore, an inquest
would have to be held. Alternatively, the coroner might consider that the reported
circumstances of a death do not give rise to reasonable cause for him/her to suspect a
152
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
violent or unnatural death, but that the cause of death is not known or not known with a
sufficient degree of confidence to permit certification of the cause of death by a doctor. In
that event, the coroner would have to hold an inquest because of section 8(1)(b).
Sometimes, of course, there will be reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased has
died a sudden and unnatural death of which the cause is unknown (i.e. a death falling
within section 8(1)(a) and (b)). This would arise, for example, where a decomposed body
is found in circumstances suggestive of a fall or other form of violent death.
7.20 However, in relation to many cases reported to him/her, the coroner will conclude that the
death does not come into any of the categories set out in section 8, and that, consequently,
there is no power or requirement to hold an inquest.
7.21 In those circumstances, the coroner will often issue a Form 100A. I referred to the use of
Form 100A in Chapter Six. On the form, the coroner states, ‘The circumstances
connected with the death of the above person have been reported to me and I do not
consider it necessaryto hold an inquest’. The purpose of the form, which is supplied
by the Registrar General, is to notify the registrar of the coroner’s decision not to hold an
inquest. The form also indicates that no post-mortem examination is to be held.
Section 15 of the Coroners Act 1988
7.22 Section 15 of the Act deals with the situation where the coroner has reason to believe that
the circumstances of a death require an inquest but where the body has been destroyed
or removed from his district. In such a situation s/he may report the death to the Home
Secretary, who may then order him/her to open an inquest.
Sections 19 and 20 of the Coroners Act 1988
7.23 By section 20(1) of the 1988 Act, a coroner may, at any time after he has decided to hold
an inquest:
‘(a) request anylegallyqualified medical practitioner to make a postmortem
examination of the bodyor a special examination of the
bodyor both such examinations; or
(b) request anyperson whom he considers to possess special
qualifications for conducting a special examination of the bodyto
make such an examination’.
7.24 Thus, section 20 authorises a post-mortem examination and/or a ‘special examination’
to be ordered in cases in which the coroner has decided to hold an inquest.
7.25 The situation will often arise, however, where an immediate decision about whether to hold
an inquest is not possible. This situation could arise, for example, where there is no reason
to suspect that the death was violent, unnatural or occurred in prison, but where the cause
of death is not sufficiently known to permit certification by a doctor and may be revealed
by a post-mortem examination. In that event, the coroner may, under section 19, order a
post-mortem examination to be carried out, if s/he is of the opinion that such an
examination may prove an inquest to be unnecessary. If, as a result of the post-mortem
153
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
examination findings, the coroner is satisfied that an inquest is unnecessary, s/he must
send to the registrar a certificate, stating the cause of death as disclosed in the
post-mortem examination report. That certificate is known as Form 100B. I referred to this
form in Chapter Six. The informant then attends the registrar in the usual way. When the
death is registered, the cause of death is taken by the registrar, not from an MCCD (there
is unlikely to be one in existence), but from the coroner’s Form 100B. If the post-mortem
examination does not disclose an ascertained cause of death, the coroner must proceed
to hold an inquest.
7.26 A ‘special examination’ is defined in section 20 of the 1988 Act as an examination:
‘... bywayof analysis, test or otherwise of such parts or contents of the
bodyor such other substances or things as ought in the opinion of the
coroner to be submitted to analyses, tests or other examination with a
view to ascertaining how the deceased came byhis death’.
7.27 Section 19 does not appear to confer on a coroner the power to order a special
examination where no decision has been taken to hold an inquest. Moreover, the authority
given by section 20 seems to authorise a coroner to request a special examination of the
body only in those cases where s/he has already decided to hold an inquest. Yet coroners
do order special examinations in cases where no decision to hold an inquest has been
taken.
7.28 When ordering a special examination in a case where no decision has yet been taken to
hold an inquest, some coroners rely on the provisions of section 19(2), which provides
that, where a post-mortem examination is directed in a case in which the coroner believes
that the examination may prove an inquest to be unnecessary, s/he shall have ‘for the
purposes of a post-mortem examination under this section ... the like powers,
authorities and immunities as if the examination were a post-mortem examination
directed bythe coroner at an inquest into the death of the deceased’. They contend
that section 19(2) gives the coroner the power to order a special examination, even where
the post-mortem examination has been ordered under section 19. Others view histological
examination as ‘part of’ the post-mortem examination. This view is given some limited
support by the fact that Form 100B contains the question ‘Is a histological or
bacteriological examination to be made?’ Since that form is only used when a decision
has been made not to hold an inquest (i.e. when a post-mortem examination under section
19 has been carried out and has revealed a medical cause of death), and since section
19 appears to confer no power to order special examinations, it would make little sense if
the examinations referred to on Form 100B were to be regarded as special examinations.
So, the argument goes, they must be regarded, not as special examinations, but as part
of the post-mortem examination.
7.29 Whatever the current legal position, it is obviously desirable that coroners should have the
full range of investigative tools at their disposal in every case, not only where an inquest
is inevitable from the start.
Concurrent Proceedings or Inquiries
7.30 In the event that criminal proceedings have been commenced in connection with a death,
the coroner must adjourn the inquest unless the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
154
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
informs him/her that an adjournment is unnecessary. The inquest may be resumed only at
the conclusion of proceedings (unless the DPP notifies the coroner that it is open to
him/her to do so earlier) and if, in the coroner’s opinion, there is sufficient cause to resume.
In most cases, the coroner will not resume the inquest, but will merely send the registrar
a certificate stating the results of the relevant criminal proceedings. An inquest must also
be adjourned, in the absence of exceptional reasons to the contrary, where the Lord
Chancellor informs the coroner before the conclusion of the inquest that a public inquiry
conducted or chaired by a judge is being or is to be held into the events surrounding the
death. This provision was used to prevent simultaneous investigations into the deaths of
Shipman’s patients being conducted by the coroner and by this Inquiry: see Chapter Two
of my First Report.
Some Weaknesses of the Current Coronial System
The Dual Nature of the Coroner’s Duties
7.31 I have said that the professional qualification of the coroner may be either medical or legal.
Some functions of the coroner (such as the conduct of inquests) require legal knowledge
and experience and some (such as the determination of whether a death is or is not due
to a natural disease process) require medical knowledge and experience. It seems to me
that, in order to be able to fulfil all the present duties, a coroner should, ideally, have
knowledge and experience of both medicine and the law. I have already said that a small
number of coroners are, in fact, dually qualified.
7.32 Some legally qualified coroners now seek to appoint a medically qualified deputy. This
may reflect their recognition of the need for medical expertise in the coroner’s office. This
solution is not ideal. The coroner and deputy cannot work in harness. As I have said,
section 7 of the 1988 Act permits a deputy or assistant deputy coroner to act only when
the coroner is ill or is absent for any lawful or reasonable cause. The deputy may also
conduct an inquest which the coroner is disqualified from holding. Some coroners say that
they seek advice from their deputies, which suggests that they are doing so when the
deputy is not on duty. Others make it plain that they disregard the statutory rule; the
deputies work even though the coroner is not ‘absent’. Dr Nigel Chapman, HM Coroner for
Nottinghamshire, told the Inquiry that he is so busy with and interested in the medical
aspects of his work that he instructs one of his legally qualified deputies to conduct many
inquests. This practice, which may seem sensible, breaches section 7 but no action has
been taken to stop it.
7.33 As I shall go on to explain, it seems to me that the fact that both medical and legal expertise
is not available in each coroner’s office at all times is a serious weakness of the present
system.
Competing Demands on the Coroner’s Time
7.34 In cases that go to inquest, the coroner is involved in the process of enquiry from an early
stage until the day of the inquest when s/he also assumes his/her judicial role. There is an
obvious tension between, on the one hand, the demands on a coroner’s time made by the
155
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
requirement of preparation for and attendance at inquests, together with other duties
necessitating his/her absence from the office, and, on the other hand, the need to deal with
the constant daily stream of cases referred by doctors, registrars, the police or other
agencies for advice and decisions. Mr Pollard’s evidence was that he spends the
equivalent of three full days a week in preparing for and conducting inquests. Mr Burgess
said that he typically spends between two and two and a half days each week sitting on
inquests and a further half to one day on preparation. Inquests are frequently held at some
distance from a coroner’s office, making communication between the coroner and his/her
staff more difficult.
7.35 Whilst the conduct of inquests might at first sight appear more important, the other
decisions for which the coroner is responsible are also of considerable potential
importance, since they will determine whether or not an individual death is to be subjected
to any official investigation. If, in relation to an individual death that has been reported to
the coroner, the coroner decides that s/he has no power to hold an inquest and the cause
of death is certified by a doctor, the overwhelming likelihood is that the death will pass
through the remaining formal procedures without difficulty. If the deceased is to be buried,
the death will be subjected to no further check. If s/he is to be cremated, the death is still
unlikely to be subjected to any significant investigation. The fact that the death has been
reported to the coroner and the coroner has ‘cleared’ the MCCD will confer on that
certificate an authority which is likely to discourage further enquiry. Even if anyone has
concerns or doubts about the death, those are likely to be quieted by the knowledge that
the coroner has been informed of the death and permitted certification. It is not widely
recognised that the involvement of the coroner often amounts only to a brief telephone
conversation between a member of his/her staff and the certifying doctor, with no other
investigation of the circumstances of the death.
7.36 Some decisions about the cause of death require urgent attention; delay can frequently
mean disruption of the funeral arrangements. This is always a distressing prospect, but
particularly so for members of certain religious groups. One of the important issues which
I shall address later in this Report is whether it is practicable and appropriate for one
person to combine the coroner’s role of presiding over and preparing for inquests with the
task of giving careful and proper consideration to the investigation and resolution of the
issues of medical cause of death which are referred to the coroner’s office on a daily basis.
Variabilityof Standards and Practice
7.37 One of the most frequent criticisms of the coronial system is that it operates very differently
in various parts of the country. I have encountered many instances where there is lack of
uniformity. In Chapter Four, I have mentioned geographical differences in practice
concerning the removal of bodies to funeral directors’ premises. In Chapter Six, I
highlighted the differing practices of coroners concerning the issuing of Forms 100A and
requiring reports by registrars on Form 52. I shall shortly deal with ‘local rules’ and the
different lists that individual coroners issue, describing the categories of case that they
expect to be reported to them. The Inquiry has heard about wide variations in the
approach of different coroners towards autopsies, particularly relating to the use of
histology and toxicology. There are also great differences in the way in which coroners run
156
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
their offices and in the way in which their staff work. In Chapter Eight, I will explain the great
variation that exists in the tasks performed by coroner’s officers working in different
districts. The Coroner’s Officers Association is concerned that the lack of uniformity is
leading to a variation in the standard of service that is being provided to the public. I am
sure there are other examples of differences in practice that I have not mentioned and it
was not, of course, possible for the Inquiry to examine the practice in every district in the
country.
7.38 That the system is variable can be demonstrated by consideration of the statistics
produced by the Home Office. For example, in 2001, the proportion of cases reported to
the coroner which resulted in an inquest varied very greatly. Although, typically, between
10% and 20% of all reported deaths were followed by inquests, the overall range was very
wide. In North Tyneside, 53% of reported deaths were followed by inquest. In North
Lancashire, the proportion was 2%. It is difficult to resist the inference that coroners are
applying differing standards when reaching their decisions. Similarly, there was a wide
variation between the proportion of reported deaths in which an autopsy was held. For
example, in the District of North and East Cambridgeshire, an autopsy was held in 96%
of all non-inquest deaths. In the adjacent District of South and West Cambridgeshire, the
comparable figure was 45%. In the Scarsdale District of Derbyshire, the figure was 36%.
There is also some variation in the proportion of inquest cases in which an autopsy is held.
In most districts, there is an autopsy in virtually every inquest case but, in some, there is
no autopsy in a significant proportion of cases. For example, in 2001, in Milton Keynes
there was no autopsy in 26% of inquest cases. In Manchester West District, the figure was
29%. These disparities strongly suggest a wide variability of standards and practice.
7.39 Home Office Research Study 241 entitled ‘Experiencing Inquests’ was published in
November 2002. The authors, members of Bristol University Law Department (including
one professor), observed a total of 81 inquests in nine coroner’s districts and interviewed
12 coroners and deputy coroners and 13 coroner’s officers. Their Study confirmed the
existence of a general variation in practice relating to inquests and highlighted
considerable variation in the approach of coroners towards the calling of witnesses to give
oral evidence and towards the airing of evidence relating to issues of culpability.
7.40 It seems to me that this variation of standards and practice is the result of two main
features. The first is the lack of regulation, leadership, guidance and training provided for
coroners. The second, which may flow from the first, is that coroners take different
approaches to their statutory duties and to the ways in which they organise the work within
their offices.
Lack of Regulation, Leadership, Guidance and Training
7.41 It has long been recognised that those taking judicial decisions must be – and must be
seen to be – independent. Judges and coroners cannot be directed to take their decisions
in a particular way. They cannot be ‘managed’ by an executive. However, there are many
ways in which good practice can be fostered without any loss of judicial independence.
That is exemplified by the training and guidance already given to other members of the
judiciary. Unfortunately, no such advice or guidance has been given successfully and
consistently to coroners. To a very large extent, coroners are left to their own devices.
157
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
7.42 One method of promoting consistency is by the imposition of statutory rules of procedure.
The existing Coroners Rules are mainly procedural rules relating to conduct of autopsies
and inquests. They do not seek to regulate, by stipulating relevant criteria, the way in
which the coroner approaches his/her decisions. Moreover, they have not changed with
changing times. There is no committee charged with regular review of the Rules.
7.43 There is no senior coroner who can give guidance to other coroners. Nor is there an
appellate court by which unsatisfactory decisions can be set aside. The only supervision
exercised over the decisions of coroners is by the High Court under the procedure of
judicial review and for the limited purpose of directing that an inquest be held, under
section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. The grounds on which judicial review can succeed
are very limited; the applicant must show that the decision under review is either unlawful
or unreasonable. A poor decision or poor practice cannot be corrected. Applications for
judicial review are rare, although they have increased in recent years. The judges have
been able to offer some guidance on difficult points of law, but this has necessarily been
limited to the issues that have arisen in the few cases where judicial review has been
entertained.
7.44 The only circumstances in which coroners meet to discuss their work is through the
medium of the Coroners’ Society. Although, at present, all coroners are members of the
Coroners’ Society, membership is voluntary. Not all members attend meetings. Many
coroners have little contact with what their colleagues are doing and operate in virtual
isolation without the kind of peer support available to those holding other types of judicial
office. The fact that most coroners are employed only part-time exacerbates the position.
They have to fit their coronial duties around their professional and other commitments.
7.45 Until recently, there was virtually no training available for coroners. Prior to 1983, the
Coroners’ Society assumed sole responsibility for training but, since that time, the Home
Office has also been involved. The extent of training was at first very limited and was not
compulsory. About three years ago, however, the Coroners’ Society urged the
Government to allocate increased resources for training and matters have improved, but
only slightly. Training is still not compulsory and, according to Mr Burgess, there are some
senior coroners who never undertake the voluntary training that is available because they
believe they know all that there is to know.
Different Approaches to Statutory Duties and the Organisation of Work
7.46 The second reason why standards and practice are so variable is that coroners interpret
the statutory provisions in different ways. Because there is no appeal structure and judicial
review applications are relatively rare, coroners are effectively free to develop their own
responses to the legislative provisions. In the remainder of this Chapter, I shall provide
several examples of the way in which these factors result in variability of practice between
different coroner’s districts.
Decisions about Jurisdiction
The Initial Report of a Death
7.47 The coroner’s jurisdiction is dependent upon a report made by some person, either as the
result of a statutory duty to report or as a voluntary act. As I have already explained, apart
158
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
from where a death occurs in custody (when there are special obligations to report the
death), the registrar is the only class of person with a statutory duty to report a death to the
coroner. Although it is little known, there is a common law duty on everyone to report to the
coroner or to the police circumstances requiring the holding of an inquest.
7.48 There is no standard way of recording a report to the coroner. Most reports are made by
telephone and a member of staff, usually a coroner’s officer, will deal with the call. Whether
or not the officer makes a note will depend on the nature of the report and the practice
within the relevant office. If a note is made, the amount of information recorded will vary
from office to office; for example, far more information is recorded in the office of the
Nottinghamshire Coroner than in that of the Coroner for Greater Manchester South District.
Each office devises a method thought to be suitable to its own needs and the resources
available. In some offices, a written or computerised record is made of every telephone
call received by the office in connection with a death. In others, no record at all is made
of calls from doctors seeking to ‘discuss’ a death when the discussion results in
‘permission’ being given to a doctor to issue an MCCD; a record is made only if the case
gives rise to a need for the issue of a Form 100A.
7.49 Most reports to the coroner are made by doctors. They rely mainly on the guidance printed
in the books of MCCDs issued to them by the General Register Office. This reproduces
regulation 41 of the Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987, which sets out a
list of criteria identifying those categories of death where a duty is imposed on the registrar
to report the death to the coroner. This regulation is set out in paragraph 6.12. The list of
criteria in regulation 41 does not replicate the list of categories of deaths in which the
coroner is required to hold an inquest contained in section 8 of the Coroners Act 1988; it
is longer and more detailed. Although it incorporates all those types of death in respect of
which the coroner is required to hold an inquest, it also specifically identifies a number of
factual circumstances which would bring a case within the section 8 categories. For
example, it refers to deaths occurring during an operation and deaths which appear to
have been due to industrial disease or industrial poisoning. Both types of death might
potentially fall within the ‘unnatural’ categorisation. I find it strange that the regulation 41
list and the section 8 list are not the same, but it is not perhaps surprising that it was felt
necessary to specify some of the more common types of unnatural death for the
assistance of registrars who are neither medically nor legally qualified.
7.50 Many coroners, however, consider that even the regulation 41 list is not sufficient and they
issue (not only to registrars, but also to hospitals and doctors) their own lists of the types
of case that they wish to have reported to them; such lists can, of course, have no legal
status. Mr Dorries, who has written a well-respected textbook on coroners’ law and
practice1, has circulated locally a list of the types and categories of deaths that he would
like to be reported to him and a modified version of that list appears on page 46 of his
textbook. As he says in introducing the list in the textbook:
‘The present requirements for reporting deaths to the coroner are a
muddle of legislation, common law and varying advice. This is most
unsatisfactoryand in an effort to provide doctors in his jurisdiction with
1 Dorries, CP (1999) ‘Coroner’s Courts – a guide to law and practice’. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
159
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
some clear guidance the author prepared the list set out ... in Table 3.2.
With one or two minor amendments this has found a general measure of
favour among coroners in the Yorkshire region.
It should be clearlyexplained that the list is merelythe author’s own
interpretation of statute and (hopefully) common sense combined. It is,
of course, possible to find exceptions or arguments in manyof the
categories.’
7.51 Inevitably, as Mr Dorries acknowledges, the drawing up of an illustrative list will always be
vulnerable to criticism on the grounds of unwarranted inclusion or exclusion of certain
types of death. Some coroners regard the practice of circulating lists of criteria with local
variations as undesirable. Those who issue them wish to extend the range of deaths
reported to them, expecting that this will improve their chances of catching more of the
deaths that warrant the holding of an inquest. This practice, adopted no doubt with the
best of intentions, is bound to lead to some variability of practice. It explains, at least in
part, the difficulties many doctors have in recognising reportable deaths. Indeed, local
lists may actually exacerbate those difficulties. During the course of the Inquiry, as I
considered the lists set out in section 8 and regulation 41 and the various lists of
‘reportable deaths’ issued by different coroners, I became gradually less surprised that
doctors should have difficulty in making reliable decisions about whether an individual
death ought to be reported, as the research I mentioned in Chapter Five shows that they
do. Those doctors who move from one district to another during their early years will no
doubt observe the variation in coroner’s practice.
7.52 The evidence suggests that some doctors do not know which of the requirements
imposed in their district are based on regulation 41 and which are imposed by the local
coroner or are based on local custom and practice. Registrars are not always informed of
local rules; for example, Mr Pollard did not tell the Tameside registrars that he had
imposed a local rule requiring the reporting of deaths occurring within 24 hours of
admission to hospital.
The Criteria for the Decision about Jurisdiction following the Report of a Death – Was the
Death Violent or Unnatural?
7.53 As I have said, section 8 of the 1988 Act requires the coroner to accept jurisdiction in
respect of any death reported to him/her if there is reasonable cause to suspect that the
death was violent or unnatural or was sudden and of unknown cause or if it occurred in
prison or in other circumstances in which an inquest is required by statute. If none of those
criteria is satisfied, the coroner has no power to conduct an inquest or to order an autopsy
and has therefore no jurisdiction. If any one or more of them is satisfied, s/he has
jurisdiction and must hold an inquest, unless an autopsy has disclosed the cause of a
sudden death not meeting any of the other criteria.
7.54 Decisions as to whether there is a reasonable suspicion that the death was violent are not
usually difficult; in general, the circumstances in which the death or injury came to the
attention of the reporting doctor will suggest a history of violence or the body will show
160
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
signs of violence. However, determining whether or not there is reasonable cause to
suspect that the death was unnatural may not be as straightforward.
7.55 There are two aspects to such decisions. First, there is the practical problem of receiving
sufficient reliable information on which to base a decision. There can be no doubt that the
coroner is entitled to undertake preliminary enquiries in order to reach a decision. The
coroner has no power to call for documents, such as medical records, although I heard
evidence that some coroners, or their officers, do so. Some also make enquiries of a
member of the deceased’s family. However, I have the clear impression that most initial
decisions are based solely upon the information received from the person making the
report, usually a doctor. That information might or might not be accurate and reliable; the
person receiving the information might or might not make a full and accurate record of it.
7.56 Second, the question of whether a death is or is not ‘natural’ involves very difficult
questions of law. Much light has been thrown on this issue by recent decisions of the Court
of Appeal such as R v Inner London North Coroner, ex parte Touche2 and R v Poplar
Coroner, ex parte Thomas3. Even so, the issue is not always simple. It is now established
that, where a death appears to have been due to natural causes, but contributed to by
human failure or neglect, the failure or neglect must be of an obvious nature in order for
there to be reasonable cause to suspect that the death was unnatural. There will also be
cases which fall outside the category of ‘neglect’ and yet call for an inquest on the basis
that the death, though in part resulting from ‘natural causes’, was wholly unexpected and
would not have occurred but for some culpable human failure and was therefore in all the
circumstances unnatural. However, the coroner is not expected to hold an inquest simply
because there may be some question of negligence: see R v HM Coroner for North
Humberside and Scunthorpe, ex parte Jamieson4 and the case of Touche referred to
above.
7.57 An illustration of this second problem would be the common occurrence of the death of
an elderly person following a fall. Some doctors regard a frail elderly person’s propensity
to fall as a natural consequence of the ageing process. So, if a fall results in an injury (often
a hip fracture) which causes immobilisation leading to bronchopneumonia and death,
they would say that the death is natural. A coroner might accept that view. Other doctors
and coroners would say that any fall, even a spontaneous fall, is a traumatic and unnatural
event and, if it is part of the chain of causation leading to death, the death is unnatural.
Some coroners would say that, if the fall were spontaneous, the death is natural but if it
were caused, say, by a defective carpet, then the death is unnatural. Finally, some
coroners might regard such a death as violent and, therefore, as requiring an inquest. So,
coroners will reach different conclusions about the need for an inquest in such a case.
7.58 Accepted learning about what amounts to a natural or unnatural death is not always logical
or satisfactory. It appears to be generally accepted that a death due to smoking is a
‘natural’ death. It is also accepted that a death due to lung cancer caused by the inhalation
of asbestos fibres is an ‘unnatural’ death. Both are due to the inhalation of a known
2 [2001] QB 1206.
3 [1993] QB 610.
4 [1995] QB 1.
161
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
carcinogen. If the death might be due to exposure during employment, it will be treated
as unnatural. Regulation 41 requires registrars to report a death which appears to have
been due to industrial disease or industrial poisoning. This is presumably because such
a death is to be regarded as ‘unnatural’ and therefore falling within section 8 of the
Coroners Act 1988. The distinction conventionally drawn between a cancer death due to
asbestos and one due to cigarette smoking does not appear rational.
7.59 There was some evidence before the Inquiry that coroners’ decisions on whether there is a
reasonable suspicion that the death was unnatural are not always satisfactory. Dr Gordon
Pledger, Medical Referee at the Newcastle-upon-Tyne crematorium, told the Inquiry of a
case that had caused him concern. When reading a cremation Form B, he had noticed
that the deceased was said to have died as a result of a head injury sustained in a road
traffic accident two years before. There was no reference to the coroner on the Form B so
Dr Pledger, being of the view that the death plainly called for an inquest, telephoned the
coroner’s office. He was told that the coroner was aware of the case and had decided not
to hold an inquest. Yet, a death caused by injuries sustained in a road traffic accident
would be regarded by most coroners as plainly ‘unnatural’. It may be that the time which
had elapsed since the accident explains the coroner’s decision. However, the nature of
the cause of the death is unaffected by time.
7.60 I heard evidence that, sometimes, a coroner’s officer will reject a report on the basis that
‘the coroner is not interested in that’ and that no inquest will thus be held. For example, a
Tameside registrar who attempted to report a death due to ‘e-coli’ was told that the coroner
would not ‘accept it’, but would do so if any further deaths from that cause came to light.
I do not see how the coroner could conclude that there was no reasonable cause to
suspect that the death was due to neglect (e.g. by lack of proper hygiene precautions)
without making some preliminary enquiries. The information given by the registrar, limited
to the mere cause of death, could not be a sufficient basis for decision. Furthermore, the
suggestion that a second death from the same cause would be treated differently by the
coroner’s office made no sense at all.
7.61 Similarly, there was evidence that one coroner would not accept a death due to
tuberculosis. Such a death is to be regarded as ‘unnatural’ (and therefore requires an
inquest) if it had resulted from occupational exposure to infection, for example, of a nurse
in an isolation hospital. It is listed on the reverse side of the MCCD as an infectious disease
which may be of industrial origin. Its causes are said to include ‘contact at work’. The
Tameside registrar reporting it did not know how the disease had been contracted. The
Coroner for Greater Manchester South District declined to hold an inquest, saying that
tuberculosis was a naturally occurring disease. In evidence, it was apparent that he had
not appreciated that, in some circumstances, such a death might be related to the
deceased’s occupation and therefore regarded as ‘unnatural’.
7.62 On another occasion, a Tameside registrar telephoned the coroner’s office to report a
case in which the word ‘dehydration’ appeared on the MCCD. Registrars are instructed
that, if the word ‘dehydration’ appears within the causes of death given on an MCCD, they
must report the death to the coroner. The registrar completed Form 52 stating that
dehydration was a reportable cause of death. The note made at the coroner’s office was
162
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
that the registrar was ‘Unable to accept dehydration without clearance’. The reason
why registrars are instructed to report cases of dehydration is that they may result from
some form of neglect, so that the death may not have been natural. In the event, the
registrar was given ‘clearance’ by the coroner’s office by means of a Form 100A without
any further enquiries being made. Thus, the coroner’s office never discovered whether the
dehydration resulted from neglect, or was the result of a natural disease process; instead,
the report was treated merely as a procedural exercise. This defeated the whole purpose
of the rule that such a death should be reported and of the intention that this should lead
to an enquiry as to whether there had been any form of neglect.
7.63 Another case concerned two daughters of a deceased person who were concerned about
his death. They expressed their concern to the registrar and said that they did not wish to
register the death. The registrar telephoned the coroner’s office to report the death. The
deceased had, according to his daughters, appeared to be making good progress after
a stroke and was about to be discharged from hospital, when he died suddenly. His
daughters wanted an explanation as to why he had died so suddenly. The cause of death
was certified by a doctor as bronchopneumonia resulting from a stroke. A member of the
coroner’s staff spoke to the certifying doctor, who said that he was ‘quite happywith the
cause of death’. At that stage, neither the coroner nor any member of his staff spoke to a
member of the deceased’s family to ascertain the detailed reasons for their concern. On
the basis of what the doctor had said, the coroner directed that a Form 100A should be
issued, notifying the registrar that he did not consider it necessary to hold an inquest. One
of the coroner’s staff telephoned one of the deceased’s daughters and informed her that
the coroner was ‘happywith’ the cause of death the doctor had given and would not order
an autopsy. The daughter was not satisfied and wanted an autopsy. She was offered an
opportunity to speak to the coroner personally but declined, saying that if he had made
that decision, she did not want to speak to him but would take the matter further from there.
In the event, she made a complaint through the hospital complaints procedure. In oral
evidence, the coroner told this Inquiry that he had a report of a natural cause of death from
the doctor and did not regard it as necessary to speak to the family, in order to ascertain
the nature of their concerns, before taking a decision. He said that, where there was a
conflict between the view of the doctor and the view of the family, he had to take the view
of the professional. It may be that, in this instance, the professional’s view was indeed
correct. But until the coroner had informed himself of the family’s concerns, he was not in
a position to judge whether there was a reasonable cause to suspect that the death was
unnatural.
7.64 These cases suggest that the bases upon which some coroners decide whether or not to
accept jurisdiction in respect of a particular death are variable and of doubtful validity.
The Criteria for the Decision about Jurisdiction following the Report of a Death – Is the
Cause of Death Known?
7.65 Under section 8(1)(b) of the 1988 Act, the coroner has to determine whether there is
‘reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased ... has died a sudden death of which
the cause is unknown’. It should be noted that the requirement is for suddenness and an
unknown cause. The words suggest that there is no need for the coroner’s intervention if
163
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
the death is slow and expected (i.e. not sudden) but of unknown cause. I do not think that
that can have been the intention of Parliament. Assuming that the intention of Parliament
was that there should be an enquiry into all deaths of which the cause is unknown, the
wording of this sub-section seems to presuppose that all deaths that are not sudden are
of known cause. I very much doubt that that is always the case.
7.66 It seems clear to me that what the provision is really driving at must be whether or not the
cause of death is sufficiently known. The expression ‘reasonable cause to suspect that
the deceased ... has died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown’ is an
unfortunate one. Whether or not something is sufficiently ‘known’ cannot be a matter of
suspicion; the question should be whether the cause of death is known to a sufficient
degree of confidence. It is to be hoped that coroners understand that that is the issue that
governs this aspect of their jurisdiction.
7.67 If a deceased’s doctor says that s/he does not know the cause of death and there is no
other doctor qualified to issue an MCCD who has the necessary knowledge, the case falls
within section 8(1)(b) and the coroner must either order an autopsy under section 19 or
hold an inquest.
7.68 More difficult cases arise where the doctor is uncertain whether or not s/he is sufficiently
confident of the cause of death to certify or is uncertain as to whether the condition s/he
believes caused the death of itself gives rise to a duty to report the death. The doctor may
then telephone the coroner’s office for advice. Assuming that the proposed cause of death
is not of itself such as to require the opening of an inquest, the issue for the coroner (or
his/her officer) is whether it appears from the information available that the cause of death
is known with a sufficient degree of confidence, such that there is no reason to suspect
that the cause of death is unknown. Even if the doctor him/herself expresses confidence
in the cause of death, that is not necessarily the end of the matter. The coroner (or his/her
officer) may conclude that, in the circumstances (e.g. because the doctor has not seen
the deceased recently and is not therefore in a position to diagnose the cause of death),
there is still reason to suspect that the cause of death is unknown. It is for the coroner or the
coroner’s officer to judge whether the cause of death is known with sufficient confidence to
avoid jurisdiction arising under section 8(1)(b).
7.69 Even where the deceased’s doctor was in regular attendance on the deceased to the end
of his/her life, is confident that s/he knows the cause of death and the coroner has no
reason to doubt the doctor’s word, difficulties can arise. As is made clear in the judgement
of Simon Brown LJ in the Touche case cited above, it is quite likely that there will in many
cases be several causes of death. In that case, the deceased had died shortly after giving
birth by caesarean section. The medical causes of death, as recorded in the autopsy
report and accepted by the coroner, were ‘Ia. Brain swelling and tonsillar herniation
b. Intra cerebral haemorrhage II. Recent pregnancy’. These were undoubtedly
accurate statements of the medical cause of death but provided an incomplete
explanation for the death. Why had the deceased suffered an intra-cerebral
haemorrhage? When the whole picture was later considered, it became clear that the
underlying cause of Mrs Touche’s death was that she must have developed very high
blood pressure in the post-operative phase. This was a well-recognised complication; yet
164
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the hospital had failed to monitor her blood pressure and treat it if it rose. That failure was
a contributory cause of the death. The current system by which coroners or their officers
decide whether or not jurisdiction arises seems to me to require the person receiving the
report of death to be very astute to the potential significance of underlying or contributory
causes; yet these reports are very often received by untrained staff and, to the extent that
they may be considered by coroners in person, there is wide variation in the approaches
taken. That doctors and coroners may focus on the immediate medical cause without
considering the relevant wider picture is evidenced by the case in which death took place
some time after a road traffic accident (see paragraph 7.59) and also by the death of
Mrs Renate Overton, whose case I shall deal with in Chapter Thirteen.
7.70 As I have intimated, many reports or ‘requests for advice’ from doctors to the coroner,
relating to uncertainty over the cause of death, are taken by coroner’s officers. In Greater
Manchester South District, at least until recently, decisions about whether or not the
Coroner would ‘accept’ the case were taken by coroner’s officers. I had the clear
impression that these officers did not realise that they were making decisions about
jurisdiction on the Coroner’s behalf. That is not intended as a personal criticism of them;
they have had no formal training. Although they knew that, if the doctor did not know the
cause of death, the case had to be ‘accepted’, I do not think they had any idea of where
to draw the line in a case of doubt. They said that, if in doubt, they would consult the
Coroner. I had the impression that they did so only occasionally. In any event, I think they
would often have been unable to equip themselves with the information needed to enable
the Coroner to reach a well informed decision. The coroner’s officers frequently gave
‘advice’ to doctors to issue an MCCD, which advice, in effect, amounted to a decision,
made on the Coroner’s behalf, to decline jurisdiction. I do not think they ever realised that
that is what they were doing. I think it is inappropriate that they were allowed to do so,
although I am sure that the practice is not unique to that office.
7.71 Even in cases where it is the coroner personally who takes the decision, some further
difficulty might well arise because it is not clear what level of confidence is required before
s/he should decide that no inquest is needed and should encourage the treating doctor
to certify the cause of death. Some coroners appear to apply a much higher standard of
confidence than others. There is little guidance in the statute as to what standard is to be
applied. The use in section 8(1) of the 1988 Act of the words ‘reasonable cause to
suspect’, inappropriate though those words are, suggests a fairly low threshold before an
inquest must be held and the need for a fairly high degree of confidence in the accuracy
of the cause of death before the treating doctor should be encouraged to certify. It might
be thought that good practice and the satisfactory operation of the death certification and
coronial systems should require a high degree of confidence in the accuracy of the cause
of death.
7.72 However, if a coroner imposes too high a standard of confidence, the result is neither
sensible nor practicable. If the coroner, on receiving the report of the death, decides that
the cause of death is unknown, s/he is virtually bound, under the present system, to order
an autopsy, as that is necessary if s/he is to certify the cause of death without an inquest.
Although the coroner could speak to the deceased’s family and to witnesses with
knowledge of the circumstances of the death and could examine any medical records
165
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
made available voluntarily, in practice s/he moves straight to the autopsy as the first tool
of investigation. Autopsies are expensive and a drain on resources. Moreover, they cause
distress to many families who are upset to think that the body of a loved one is to be (as
they see it) invaded. For some religious and ethnic minorities, there are very strong and
deep-rooted objections. Coroners know this only too well. Mr Dorries, who, I think, requires
a high degree of confidence about the cause of death before he will allow a treating doctor
to issue an MCCD, told the Inquiry that, in cases where he is sure that the death was natural
but the precise cause cannot be identified with confidence, he often wishes that he could
certify that state of affairs, rather than being obliged to order an autopsy. However, not all
coroners require so high a degree of confidence and I am sure there are many who, faced
with that situation, take the view that they can and should tell the doctor that s/he may issue
an MCCD.
7.73 It might be thought that a high standard of confidence would be desirable despite the fact
that this might lead to a large number of autopsies. If the autopsy produced a high degree
of certainty about the cause of death, the effect would be beneficial to the system, even
though unpopular with the public. However, as I shall explain in Chapter Nine, that is not
the case. The coroner’s autopsy often does not provide the ‘gold standard’ cause of death
which some believe it provides. It reveals the conditions with which the deceased has
died, but not necessarily the condition which actually caused the death. It may also reveal
one or more of several causes of death but it will not necessarily result in the identification
of the true cause of death.
Concerns about the Soundness of Decisions on Jurisdiction
Decisions Taken for Inappropriate Reasons
7.74 On the basis of the evidence received by the Inquiry, it appears to me that there are
grounds for concern about the soundness of the decisions of some coroners and
coroner’s staff on jurisdiction. Although I have no doubt that many coroners understand
and apply the correct statutory tests when making decisions under section 8 of the 1988
Act, there is also evidence that some either do not understand the criteria or are
influenced, deliberately or not, by extraneous matters. On occasions, it appears that
decisions are taken for frankly improper reasons. I give below some examples of practices
reported to the Inquiry by doctors. I acknowledge that the evidence is fragmented. The
Inquiry has not conducted any research of the wider position but my overall impression
from the evidence I have received is that the practices in question are likely to be general
and widespread, rather than specific and local, features of the coroner service.
7.75 The experience of the doctors who gave evidence to the Inquiry was variable. Dr Alan
Banks, a former general practitioner, later Assistant Director of Primary Care and Medical
Adviser to the West Pennine Health Authority, gave evidence in Stage One of Phase Two.
He said that, when working as a general practitioner in East Anglia, he used to talk to the
coroner when he was unsure whether the available medical evidence was sufficient to
enable him to certify the cause of death. Dr Banks plainly found the experience of
discussing a death in this way to be helpful. Many doctors do. Dr Frances Cranfield, a
general practitioner who gave evidence in Stage One, said that, on occasions, she would
166
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
discuss a death with the Coroner so that she would be able to indicate that she had done
so on the back of the MCCD. The Coroner would contribute little or nothing to her thinking
on the cause of death but the process of registration would be facilitated. Dr Banks
appears to have been luckier than many, in that he at least seems to have been able to
speak directly to the coroner. The experience of Dr Ian Morgan, a general practitioner and
medical referee from the West Midlands, was less satisfactory. He said that, in 15 years,
he had never spoken directly to the coroner, save when he had attended an inquest.
7.76 Dr Rachel Pyburn, now a consultant geriatrician at Hope Hospital, Salford, said that, in the
past, while working in the North East, she had had some very unsatisfactory experiences.
She had been put under pressure to issue an MCCD when she had telephoned the
coroner’s office with the intention of reporting the death, because she did not feel
confident that she knew the cause. One general practitioner from Yorkshire told the Inquiry
that he and colleagues are sometimes asked by a coroner’s officer whether they could not
put ‘bronchopneumonia’ on the MCCD, because the coroner’s office has a backlog of
autopsies to deal with. Another general practitioner, again from Yorkshire, told the Inquiry
that the coroner’s officer, a police officer, usually advises the doctor to certify the cause
of death if at all possible, even if there is uncertainty about it, so long as it is fairly clear that
the death was due to natural causes. A clinical epidemiologist told the Inquiry that he had
had conversations with a coroner about the certification of deaths following a fracture of
the neck of the femur. This coroner wished doctors to avoid mentioning such fractures on
MCCDs, even where the patient had died in the immediate period following a fracture as,
if this were done, he would be obliged to intervene, presumably because it would appear
that the death had resulted from a fall and was, therefore, unnatural. Quite apart from any
other consideration, this sort of action has the effect, as the epidemiologist pointed out, of
rendering completely unreliable statistics for excess mortality following a fractured femur.
7.77 I can see how such poor practices might arise. If a coroner is overworked or understaffed,
s/he or the coroner’s officer might be tempted to keep to a minimum the number of cases
in which the coroner assumes jurisdiction for reasons which are, in fact, inappropriate.
There will be less work to do and more deaths will be certified by the attending doctor.
Fewer autopsies and fewer inquests will be held. Costs will be reduced. By and large, the
population in the area will be content, as, in general, people do not want the bodies of their
loved ones to be invasively examined. However, such a policy reduces the efficacy of the
system to detect concealed homicide, malpractice or neglect and to provide information
which might improve knowledge on health matters. It also produces a high level of distress
and disappointment among those who are unsuccessful in securing the death
investigation that they seek.
7.78 These are important concerns. The decision of a coroner to order an autopsy or hold an
inquest is very important; yet it is not subject to any review. Indeed, the coroner does not
even have to give reasons, unless (very occasionally) required to do so for the purpose of
judicial review.
The Adequacy of the Information on which Decisions Are Taken
7.79 Even if the decision as to whether to order an autopsy or hold an inquest is taken in
completely good faith, as I accept it usually is, there is reason to believe that the evidential
167
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:53 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
basis is incomplete and unreliable. The decision is usually taken in an informal way and
without any independent investigation of the death. The usual procedure is that the doctor
wishing to report the death telephones the coroner’s office and tells the coroner’s officer
about the death. The coroner’s officer may take down some details and indicate what the
decision is likely to be or else promises to put the facts before the coroner for decision.
Some coroners will speak directly to the doctor but my impression is that that is very
unusual.
7.80 The informality of the process, in which the doctor provides only a verbal account of the
medical history and circumstances of death, is quite likely to result in the coroner’s officer
having an incomplete and imperfect understanding of the case. Not all doctors are good
historians. Most coroner’s officers do not have the medical expertise necessary to probe
the doctor’s account. The doctor might not tell the truth or the whole truth. The coroner’s
officer will know nothing about the doctor. He or she can check to ensure that the doctor
is properly registered but that is all; s/he will not be privy to any other information and will
not know, for example, whether or not the doctor has been the subject of disciplinary
action or is under the supervision of the General Medical Council. He or she will often have
no independent knowledge of the deceased’s medical history or about the circumstances
of the death, although in some areas, such as Cheshire, the coroner’s officer might
discuss these matters with the family before putting the information before the coroner.
7.81 In some cases, the doctor will have an underlying wish to issue an MCCD, possibly to save
the relatives the distress of an autopsy or inquest. In that event, s/he might well present
his/her view of the cause of death in a more confident light than the facts warrant.
Alternatively, the coroner’s officer might have a preconceived view. He or she might know
that the office has a backlog of work or that the coroner is not particularly ‘interested in’
certain types of case. In such circumstances, the coroner’s officer might well suggest to
the doctor that it appears that s/he could issue an MCCD. The giving and recording of a
complete and accurate account will not be helped by the existence of any preconceived
attitudes on the part of either the doctor or the coroner’s officer.
7.82 In my view, a single conversation with the reporting doctor is an inadequate basis for the
important decision that is to be taken. The Coroners Act 1988 and the Coroners Rules
1984 do not deal with the way in which coroners should set about investigating deaths
reported to them, nor the sources from which they should seek information. No power is
given to coroners at that stage to enter and search premises, inspect documents or seize
documents or other property relating to a death, although there is nothing to prevent a
coroner from doing so, provided s/he has the consent of the person with control of the
relevant premises, documents or property.
7.83 I consider that it would be far better if the coroner undertook some preliminary
independent investigations before making his/her decision on jurisdiction. I accept that it
would not be practicable for extensive investigations to be made at this stage. However,
it seems to me highly desirable that someone from the coroner’s office should obtain
information from relatives of the deceased, those who had care of the deceased or those
who had seen him/her recently before the death. Such a practice is usual in
Nottinghamshire and Cheshire and is clearly quite practicable. Mr Dorries introduced this
168
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
practice shortly before he gave evidence to the Inquiry and it appeared that he had found
it helpful. The cases referred to in oral evidence by Mrs Christine Hurst, senior coroner’s
officer for Cheshire, suggested that the arrangements in her District work well. When he
gave evidence to the Inquiry in November and December 2002, Mr Pollard had not yet
introduced the practice of speaking to relatives and others with knowledge of the
deceased in the Greater Manchester South District, despite his acknowledgement that the
present arrangements depend heavily on the integrity of the reporting doctor and his
detailed knowledge of Shipman’s dishonesty.
7.84 The form of any preliminary investigations might vary according to the circumstances of
the death. Under the present provisions, the coroner might not only discuss the medical
history and circumstances of death with the family or friends of the deceased or those who
have cared for the deceased such as district nurses, s/he might also (with the consent of
the next of kin) examine the deceased’s hospital or general practitioner records. On some
occasions, s/he might arrange to inspect the scene of the death. Any one or more of these
steps might reveal evidence to show that there was or was not real cause to suspect that
the death was violent or unnatural or might throw light on an uncertain cause of death.
However, coroners do not generally undertake such preliminary investigations before
reaching (or allowing an officer to reach) a decision on jurisdiction.
7.85 Whether this is because the coroner has no time for such enquiries or cannot fund them
or does not undertake them because there is no statutory power to enforce the wish to
undertake them, I do not know. No coroner told me that he wished to carry out such
examinations but was thwarted, for example, by a lack of resources. All seemed prepared
to accept the present system as it is, with all its limitations.
Decisions Taken by Coroner’s Officers
7.86 Of particular concern was the evidence about the way in which coroner’s officers – rather
than coroners – take decisions on jurisdiction; these decisions should be taken only by
coroners themselves. This practice is not universal, but, as I have already said, appears
to be widespread. Dr Chapman claimed that he had some input into most of the decisions
made or ‘advice given’ by his office. Mr Burgess permits his officers to give ‘advice’ to
doctors. It was not clear to me which types of case call for ‘advice’ and which for a decision
on jurisdiction. I suspect that the boundaries are blurred. Mr Burgess does not have any
secretarial or administrative staff but sees no reason why, if he had, they should not ‘give
advice’ to doctors. He says that all decisions taken by his officers are ultimately reported
to him, although this might not occur until some time after the decision has been taken.
His instructions about reporting decisions to him were recorded in writing for the first time
in 2001.
7.87 In the Greater Manchester South District, until recently, any member of the coroner’s staff
(i.e. the first, second, or third coroner’s officer or the clerk/typist) was authorised to deal
with enquiries from doctors. They were authorised to take a decision about whether or not
there should be an autopsy and about whether, if there was to be one, it should be
conducted by a Home Office approved pathologist. Once the autopsy had been carried
out, they were authorised to receive the results and decide whether to pass for certificates
169
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
(Form 100B and cremation Form E) to be prepared or arrange an inquest. In other words,
they took decisions on all aspects of the Coroner’s jurisdiction. Their ‘entitlement’ to take
these decisions, without reference to the Coroner, was set out in their job descriptions until
very recently. The evidence was that the staff did sometimes refer decisions to the
Coroner, but it is clear that they often did not. In any event, the Coroner would often not be
available, as he would be away conducting an inquest. I formed the view that, only if the
officer thought the case was difficult or unusual, would it be referred to the Coroner. The
junior members of staff would seek advice from the first officer if in doubt about the
decision to take. Mrs Mary Evans, first coroner’s officer from 1986 until 1999, said that a
new clerk/typist would not be able to handle a query for a considerable time after
appointment. She might take the details down but would not make a decision. However,
Miss Michelle Kennerley (now Mrs Michelle Greenwood), who began work as a
clerk/typist in the coroner’s office in May 1998, told the police in August 1998 that she
was dealing with simple queries, including giving clearance to doctors to issue MCCDs,
within a short time of beginning her employment. She claimed that by the time she left, after
seven months in the office, she had become more experienced and confident and able to
deal with straightforward cases alone and without reference to others. It may be that
Miss Kennerley was an unusually apt pupil; she had worked as a medical secretary and
was used to speaking to doctors.
7.88 The job description of the coroner’s first officer at that time appeared to entitle the
post-holder to take a wider range of decisions on the Coroner’s behalf. Her role was said
to be to ‘deputise’ for the Coroner. The extent of her delegated powers was not defined.
Plainly, she could not conduct an inquest or sign the various forms which the Coroner
would issue but it seems likely that she could do anything else.
7.89 The practice of permitting a coroner’s officer or clerk/typist to make decisions on the
coroner’s jurisdiction is plainly unsatisfactory, at least where, as in Greater Manchester
South, the officers have no medical knowledge, investigative experience or formal
training. They could not have had the knowledge necessary to ask the right questions, let
alone evaluate the answers. This practice, the Inquiry has been told, has now ceased.
The Effect of the Decision on Jurisdiction
No Jurisdiction
7.90 If, following a conversation with the reporting doctor, the coroner or one of his/her staff
decides that the cause of death is sufficiently known and that the other circumstances are
not such as to require an autopsy or inquest, the doctor will normally proceed to issue an
MCCD. I have explained in Chapter Five that the MCCD and counterfoil provide the doctor
with the opportunity to state whether s/he has reported the case to the coroner ‘for further
action’ but, for various reasons, the fact that the conversation has taken place is not
always recorded on the MCCD. Assuming that the MCCD is otherwise apparently in order,
the registrar will proceed to register the death on production of the MCCD and may not be
aware that there has been any earlier contact with the coroner. If, however, the registrar
becomes aware that there has been a report to the coroner, for example, because the
doctor indicates on the MCCD that s/he has reported the death, the registrar will require
170
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
a Form 100A (or, at least oral confirmation from the coroner that there is no intention to hold
an inquest) before the death can be registered.
7.91 Form 100A is a notification that the coroner has been informed of the death and has
decided not to hold an inquest. Its receipt provides official confirmation to the registrar that
s/he can register the death. Some coroners issue a Form 100A in respect of any death of
which they are informed, if they or an officer decide, for whatever reason but without an
autopsy, not to hold an inquest. Others issue a Form 100A only in those cases that they
regard as having been ‘formally reported’. If the death has only been discussed with the
coroner or ‘informally reported’, not only might the coroner not issue a Form 100A, but it is
quite possible that no record at all will be kept of the referral. If a record is kept, it will
probably be marked ‘NFA’ (No Further Action). Here again, there is variability of practice.
In some offices, the distinction between a formal report and ‘discussions’ and ‘requests
for advice’ and ‘informal referrals’ is wholly unclear. Clearly, good practice requires that
every contact with the coroner’s office in respect of a death should be treated as a formal
report, recorded as such and the outcome recognised as a decision on jurisdiction.
Dr Chapman and Mr Dorries both operate such a system. In Mr Burgess’ office, there is a
distinction between formal and informal referrals, although a note is kept of all contacts.
In Mr Pollard’s office, the practice has recently changed so that every contact is treated
as a referral and is considered by the Coroner. If jurisdiction is ‘declined’, a Form 100A is
issued in every case. Previously, many conversations were dealt with by the staff on an
informal basis and did not come to the attention of the Coroner. Many were not recorded;
some were recorded and marked ‘NFA’. Forms 100A were frequently not issued. It was
impossible to discern the criteria by which staff decided how to deal with any individual
enquiry.
7.92 One of the effects of permitting a coroner’s officer to take a decision without reference to
the coroner is that the decision might have been acted upon before the coroner even
knows of it. Mr Pollard agreed that, in the past, his staff made decisions on reports from
doctors and, in a case in which jurisdiction was not accepted, and the doctor was told
s/he could issue an MCCD, the doctor might well do so and give the certificate to the
deceased’s next of kin before he had seen the papers and issued a Form 100A. If the
Coroner had disagreed with the officer’s decision, that situation would have had to be set
in reverse and it is likely that it would have caused considerable distress to the deceased’s
family. Mr Burgess said that ‘he did not have a clue’ whether doctors issued MCCDs
before he had seen the papers and signed the Form 100A. It seems that the signing by
coroners of Form 100A is, on occasions, no more than a ‘rubber stamp’ of previous
decisions made by their officers.
7.93 It appears that, in some coroners’ offices, Forms 100A pre-signed by the coroner are
available to officers, who are then able to make a decision and put it fully into effect without
reference to the coroner. In Mr Pollard’s office, the staff used to keep a supply of such
forms for use when Mr Pollard was away from the office. It was claimed that he gave
permission before one was issued. Mrs Joan Collins, who was employed at the Coroner’s
office from 1985 until 2002 and was the first officer from 1999 until her retirement, said that
only in exceptional circumstances would the staff use one without his prior knowledge.
However, Mr Pollard agreed that he did not know whether staff used such forms without
171
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
his knowledge. There were no clear rules for their use and use was not audited. In my view,
it is likely that, in the past, pre-signed forms were used without specific authorisation by
the Coroner. That may well have been one of the respects in which Mrs Evans was
permitted to ‘deputise’ for the Coroner. The practice of using pre-signed forms has now
ceased.
Jurisdiction Accepted
7.94 If the decision is taken that the circumstances are such as to require an inquest to be held,
the case will be ‘taken over’ by the coroner’s office and the next stage will usually be to
order an autopsy. I shall deal with what happens next in Chapter Nine.
Particular Examples of Decisions on Jurisdiction
‘Old Age’ as a Cause of Death
7.95 In Chapter Six, I explained that some registrars are unhappy about the use of ‘old age’ as
a sole cause of death. However, if the deceased was aged 70 or over, and the MCCD is
acceptable in other respects, the registrar is virtually bound to accept it and to register the
death. Frequently, deaths where ‘old age’ is given as the cause of death will not be
reported to the coroner. However, sometimes, doctors will contact the coroner to seek
advice. Some coroners do not approve of ‘old age’ as a sole cause of death. Mr Dorries
said that, if a doctor telephones his office to ask about certifying ‘old age’ as a cause of
death, he will not approve it unless the deceased was over 80 and he is satisfied about
the medical history. Deaths suggested as being due to ‘old age’ are not on Mr Dorries’ list
of reportable deaths and he admitted in oral evidence that he had no right to impose any
conditions about use of the term. He is aware that at least some of the registrars in his
district report cases of deaths due to ‘old age’ to him but he acknowledged in oral
evidence that he did not get reports of all such cases. He said that, when doctors
contacted his office to ask advice and he and his officers did not regard ‘old age’ as an
appropriate cause of death, they would say so and the doctors would usually heed their
advice. I have given detailed consideration to the use of ‘old age’ as a cause of death in
Chapter Six.
7.96 According to Mr Pollard, the staff in the office of the Greater Manchester South District
used themselves to make a judgement about the appropriateness of ‘old age’ as the
cause of death in a case in which a doctor telephoned to ask advice. If in doubt, they would
refer the decision to him. The staff who operated this system gave varying accounts of
what happened in practice. Mrs Evans told the Inquiry that she would ask a series of
questions, including how long the doctor had been treating the patient and whether the
deceased had deteriorated gradually, as opposed to having died a sudden death.
However, when making a statement for the police investigation of Mrs Kathleen Grundy’s
death in 1998, she said that ‘... if a doctor had seen a patient within the required
fourteen days and told us that they had died of old age having basically deteriorated
over a period of time then we [i.e. the coroner’s office] would not become involved’.
She said that such conversations lasted ‘a couple of minutes’ only. Mrs Collins, who was
employed in the office from 1985 until 2002, recalled that Mr Peter Revington, the Coroner
172
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
until 1995, would be happy for ‘old age’ to be used, so long as the deceased was over 80
and had deteriorated over time. She said that Mr Pollard asked for more information than
that. Mrs Margaret Blake, the current first officer, said that the only question asked prior to
1998 was the age of the deceased; if that was 75 or over, old age was acceptable.
Mrs Blake said that she had been told that this was the policy in the office. It is doubtful
whether, prior to the enquiries about Mrs Grundy’s death in 1998, the procedure was ever
as extensive as Mrs Evans and Mrs Collins described. Mrs Blake’s account seems most
likely to be right. An internal office form dated 1985, recording a discussion with a doctor
about the appropriateness of ‘old age’ as the cause of death, contained no details at all
of the deceased’s state of health. It is clear that, in the past, many discussions were of a
superficial nature and could not have led to a fully informed decision. Mrs Collins said that,
recently, Mr Pollard has begun to speak to doctors personally in ‘old age’ cases.
7.97 The importance of a sound decision is obvious. Once the coroner has given his/her
approval to ‘old age’ as a cause of death, the doctor can tell the deceased’s family, the
registrar and the medical referee of that approval. If insufficient care is taken when making
the decision, the coroner’s imprimatur is attached to a certification that may be quite
unsatisfactory, even dishonest. ‘Old age’ has the very real potential to be used as a cause
of death when, in fact, no cause is known.
7.98 On at least one occasion, Shipman manipulated the Coroner’s staff in order to obtain the
apparent approval of the Coroner when he certified a death as being due to old age. In
the case of Mrs Grundy, who, until her death at his hand, was a very fit and active woman
of 81, Shipman wished to certify that her death was due to ‘old age’. It would have been
difficult for him to think of any specific disease process to account for the death, as those
who knew Mrs Grundy were aware that she was very well. After the death was discovered,
Shipman telephoned the coroner’s office, apparently to seek approval for his proposed
MCCD. The call lasted only 2 minutes 11 seconds. There is no record in the coroner’s
office as to who dealt with his call or what was said. It is possible that Shipman was asked
only to state Mrs Grundy’s age. If he was asked more detailed questions, it would seem
likely that he gave false details about Mrs Grundy’s previous state of health and of a
decline leading to death. No doubt, his account would have been plausible. It appears
that the member of staff must have indicated that the coroner would have no objection to
the death being certified as due to ‘old age’. In so doing, she would be doing no more than
was common practice in that office at that time. Armed with the coroner’s ‘approval’,
Shipman’s certification of Mrs Grundy’s death would not be questioned by anyone in
authority.
The ‘Either/Or Rule’
7.99 Perhaps the most common reason why a doctor will wish to speak to the coroner before
issuing an MCCD arises from the so-called ‘either/or rule’. As I have already explained,
regulation 41 of the Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987 imposes on a
registrar a duty to report to the coroner any death in which it appears that the medical
practitioner who has submitted an MCCD had not either seen the deceased within 14 days
before death or seen the body after death. I have called this the ‘either/or rule’. The
unsatisfactory effect of the rule is that, provided the doctor has seen the body after death,
173
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
it does not matter how long before death s/he last saw the patient alive. Some coroners,
recognising that the ‘either/or rule’ is unsatisfactory, demand that, if a doctor has not seen
the patient within 14 days before death, the death must be reported, regardless of whether
the doctor has seen the body after death. As I observed in my First Report, it appears that
Shipman believed that such a rule operated in the Greater Manchester South District.
Indeed, I am satisfied that it did, although I have not been able to discover when it was
introduced. It appears from the evidence of the coroner’s officers (who were unaware of
the existence of the ‘either/or rule’) that it must have been a rule of custom and practice
dating back at least to the time of Mr Revington, the Coroner who preceded Mr Pollard,
and possibly longer. It is clear that some coroners are uncertain about the ‘either/or rule’.
7.100 Dr Morgan told the Inquiry that he did not regard himself as qualified to sign an MCCD
unless he had seen the deceased within 14 days of death. He knows that that is not the
law but regards the ‘either/or rule’ as illogical. It appears that many doctors believe that
the law requires that a death should be reported to the coroner if they have not seen the
deceased within 14 days before the death, regardless of whether or not they have seen
the body after death. Mr Dorries said that, if this confusion did not exist, he would receive
far fewer telephone calls from doctors concerned about their ability to certify. It is common
practice for doctors who wish to certify the cause of a death, but who have not seen the
deceased within 14 days before death, to telephone the coroner’s office to seek
‘permission’ to do so. They believe that, if they state on an MCCD that they have not seen
the deceased within 14 days before death, the registrar will refuse to accept the
certificate, the death will be reported to the coroner and the relatives will be upset and
inconvenienced. In fact, this fear may be misplaced as, if the doctor has seen the body
after death, the registrar will accept the certificate, unless the doctor has not seen the
deceased for a very long time before the death. There is no statutory provision and no
other clear rule about how long this period of time is. However, many doctors do not
realise this.
7.101 The response of the coroners to such a request for permission to certify varies. Some
coroner’s officers ask if the doctor has seen the body after death; if s/he has not, the
coroner’s officer advises the doctor to do so. Then, provided that the doctor says that
s/he knows the cause of death and there is no other reason to report the death to the
coroner, the doctor will be ‘permitted’ to issue an MCCD and the registrar will accept it.
However, it appears that many coroners or coroner’s officers do not enquire whether the
doctor has seen the body but, on learning that the doctor has not seen the deceased within
14 days of death, engage in a discussion with the doctor about the medical history and
circumstances of death and then either give or withhold ‘permission’ for the doctor to
issue. Mr Dorries, who takes this approach, admits that, if the doctor has seen the body
after death, he has no power to give or withhold permission to the doctor to issue. The
doctor is qualified to issue and is under a duty to do so; it is a matter for his/her own
judgement whether or not s/he feels sufficiently confident about the cause of death to state
the cause in the unequivocal terms acceptable to the registrar. However, Mr Dorries takes
the view that he should advise the doctor as to the appropriate course of action. If the
advice is that the doctor should issue an MCCD, a Form 100A will be sent to the register
office. In fact, provided the doctor does not record on the MCCD that s/he has reported
174
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the death to the coroner ‘for further action’, there would be nothing on the face of the
MCCD which would render it unacceptable to the registrar or prevent registration, so that
a Form 100A would be unnecessary and not expected by the registrar.
7.102 I have already expressed my concerns about the fact that decisions of this nature are often
taken by a coroner who is not medically qualified, based on information taken by a
coroner’s officer who may have little experience of medical matters. Where the coroner is
not involved in the decision, it may be taken entirely by an officer with no formal training
or qualification. The Inquiry has come across cases where such decisions are or were
taken by coroner’s officers on a plainly inadequate basis. For many years, the staff in the
office of the Coroner for Greater Manchester South District operated a ‘rule of thumb’,
whereby the officer would say that the coroner would give ‘permission’ for the doctor to
issue an MCCD, provided that the doctor had seen the deceased within 28 days before
the death. Plainly, the notion that an important decision as to jurisdiction was being made
was far from anyone’s mind. No proper consideration was apparently given to the cause or
circumstances of death or to whether, if a doctor had not seen the deceased for 28 days,
s/he was able to be sufficiently confident of the cause of death.
7.103 It appears to me that the whole procedure relating to the ‘either/or rule’ is in a muddle,
mainly because the rule is not properly understood, even by coroners and those who work
for them. Many doctors telephone the coroner to obtain formal ‘permission’ even though,
having seen the body after death and being, therefore, qualified to issue the MCCD, they
do not need ‘permission’. Many Forms 100A are issued quite unnecessarily for the
same reason.
7.104 The position of the doctor who falls foul of the ‘either/or rule’, i.e. who has neither seen the
deceased within 14 days before death nor seen the body after death, is not regarded by
coroners as entirely clear. Mr Burgess said that this is a ‘grey area’. Yet, the coroners who
gave evidence to the Inquiry assumed (rightly, in my view) that they were entitled,
depending on the circumstances, to ‘give permission’ to the doctor to issue an MCCD.
7.105 The doctor in that position cannot issue an MCCD that will be acceptable to the registrar.
However, s/he may be qualified to complete the MCCD because s/he attended the
deceased during the last illness; in that case s/he will be under a duty to issue the MCCD,
stating the cause of death to the best of his/her knowledge and belief. However, as the
doctor knows that the registrar would reject the MCCD, s/he will report the death directly
to the coroner. If the coroner is satisfied that the doctor knows the cause of death, s/he has
no legal power to order an autopsy or hold an inquest, since the death will not fall within
section 8 of the 1988 Act (unless, of course, one of the other section 8 criteria is met). The
coroner’s task is to assess whether the cause of death is ‘known’. The likelihood of the
doctor knowing the cause of death will to some extent depend on when s/he last saw the
deceased. If the doctor says, ‘I know it was a heart attack’, but has not seen the deceased
for a year, the coroner would surely be entitled to say that s/he had reasonable cause to
suspect that the cause of death was unknown. But in the situation where the coroner is
satisfied that the doctor’s professed knowledge is soundly based, the doctor should be
permitted to complete an MCCD, Form 100A should be issued and the coroner’s role
should be at an end. In other words, the registrar is prohibited by the strict requirements
175
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
of regulation 41 from registering the death because the doctor has seen neither the
deceased within 14 days before the death nor the body after death. Registration can,
however, take place once the registrar has the coroner’s ‘permission’ to register; that
‘permission’ is granted on the basis of what is said by the doctor to the coroner and is
formally confirmed by the issue of Form 100A. The registrar will register the death as usual,
relying on the cause of death given in the MCCD.
7.106 Although some doubt was expressed about the legality of this process, I have come to the
conclusion that it is lawful. In my view, the only statutory requirement (save for the fact that
the doctor must be registered) governing the capacity of the doctor to issue the MCCD is
that s/he attended the deceased during the last illness. He or she is not disqualified from
so doing by an inability to satisfy either of the requirements of the ‘either/or rule’. That rule
only requires the death to be reported by the registrar to the coroner. But if the coroner
comes to the conclusion that the doctor did attend the deceased during the last illness
and knows the cause of death to a satisfactory degree of confidence, then the doctor’s
certificate is good and the death can properly be registered in reliance upon it.
When the General Practitioner Is Not Available
7.107 As I have just said, the essential qualification for the doctor who is to issue an MCCD is that
s/he must have attended the deceased during the last illness. However, it not infrequently
happens that the general practitioner who has attended the deceased during the last
illness is, for some reason, unable to certify the cause of death, even though s/he may
know it. For example, s/he might have been taken ill or might be away on holiday. General
practitioners who are going away on holiday at the time when they are expecting the death
of a particular patient often arrange for a colleague to visit the patient whilst still alive so
that, if the death occurs during the holiday, the colleague will be able to issue an MCCD.
But the plans sometimes go astray and there is no doctor qualified to issue an MCCD. In
these circumstances, the death must be reported to the coroner. This is often done by the
another member of the practice, who has been called out to confirm the fact that death
has occurred or has otherwise been informed of the death.
7.108 The coroner’s position is unclear. On the one hand, it might be said that the coroner must
accept jurisdiction because, if there is no MCCD, there must be ‘reasonable cause to
suspect’ that the cause of death is not known. In practice, if there is no MCCD, the only
person who can certify the cause of death is the coroner, either on the basis of an autopsy
report or after an inquest. If the coroner refuses jurisdiction and will not put him/herself in
a position to certify the cause of death, the deceased’s family is in difficulty. How is the
death to be registered? On the other hand, it might be said the coroner is not bound to
accept jurisdiction, which arises only if s/he has reasonable cause to suspect that the
deceased ‘has died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown’. It sometimes
happens that the member of the practice who has reported the death to the coroner has
access to the deceased’s medical records and has spoken to the deceased’s family
about the circumstances of the death. That doctor might be able to tell the coroner, quite
properly, that s/he is confident that the death was not sudden and that s/he knows its
cause. In those circumstances, some coroners decline jurisdiction and instruct the doctor
to issue an MCCD based on his/her knowledge of the history and circumstances. The
176
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
coroner sends a Form 100A to the register office. Yet the legal position is that the MCCD
is invalid and the Form 100A cannot make it valid. As a matter of law, the registrar should
reject the certificate and refuse to register the death. However, registrars recognise that,
if the coroner refuses jurisdiction, the family is in difficulty. Their practice is to register the
death, giving the cause either as stated on Form 100A or, failing that, taking it from the
informant, using the invalid MCCD as ‘guidance’. Dr Cleone Rooney, medical
epidemiologist at the ONS, described such deaths as ‘legally uncertified’. Mr Dorries’
practice is a variant on this. He asks the member of the practice to write a letter explaining
the situation and giving his/her opinion as to the cause of death. No MCCD is completed.
Mr Dorries’ office issues a Form 100A, giving the cause of death contained in the letter.
The registrar then registers the death, taking the cause of death from the Form 100A.
7.109 If the coroner accepts jurisdiction, s/he might order an autopsy. However, where the death
was expected and the cause known, that course of action would seem hard on the
relatives and a waste of scarce resources. Some coroners have a way round this problem.
Mr Pollard’s practice is to open and adjourn an inquest and allow disposal of the body on
the basis of the information given by the treating doctor’s colleague. By the time the
inquest is resumed, he will have obtained a letter or statement from the treating doctor,
which is then accepted in evidence and allows him to reach a verdict. If the treating doctor
is not available then (because, for example, he is ill), Mr Pollard will take the evidence from
the doctor’s colleague. An alternative course is to conduct an inquest immediately, taking
evidence from a doctor who knows the cause of death from perusal of the medical
records. Both these solutions comply with the law. Something less cumbersome would be
desirable.
Shipman’s Practice of Reporting Deaths to the Coroner
7.110 Very few of the deaths of Shipman’s patients were ever reported to the Coroner. As I
explained in Chapter Five, Shipman was able to issue an MCCD for the patients he had
killed and give false reassurance to the families that it was not necessary for the death to
be reported to the Coroner. I pointed to the essential defect in the present system that
allowed Shipman to avoid the coronial system almost entirely.
7.111 In a few cases (we do not know how many since records would not necessarily have been
kept), Shipman discussed the death of one of his patients with a member of the coroner’s
staff and obtained ‘permission’ to issue an MCCD. In this way, he forestalled any possible
query from the registrar, the deceased’s family, the doctor who would complete cremation
Form C or the medical referee about whether it was appropriate for him to certify the death.
The relevant member of the coroner’s staff never apparently doubted that permission
should be given. It is clear that, even if Shipman had made more such telephone calls, in
effect giving the coroner the opportunity to take jurisdiction in those cases, it is unlikely that
the outcome would have been different. If Shipman gave a false history and asserted that
he knew the cause of death, neither the coroner’s staff, nor even the coroner himself,
would have been able to discover that the death was sudden, unexpected and of unknown
cause, unless enquiry had been made of an independent person, such as a relative of the
deceased or some other person with knowledge of the circumstances of the death.
177
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
7.112 Thus, although I have drawn attention to a number of aspects of poor practice in coroners’
offices, the fact is that, even if those aspects were remedied, there would still be no
effective safeguard for those deaths about which a doctor chose to tell lies. If there is to
be any protection against another Shipman, or any doctor who seeks to conceal a crime
or medical error by him/herself or a colleague, all deaths must be subject to scrutiny by
someone who is independent of the certifying doctor. Furthermore, the history on which
that doctor relies must be independently verified.
Conclusions
General
7.113 The present function of the coroner is to investigate, on behalf of the state, deaths which
occur otherwise than as the result of a natural disease process. This function constitutes
an important safeguard for the ordinary citizen. It is important that the circumstances
surrounding deaths that have or might have resulted from some outside agency (such as
an accident or exposure to a noxious substance at work) are properly investigated. Under
the present system, the coroner becomes aware only of those deaths reported to him/her.
He or she has no knowledge of other deaths and no means of knowing whether, in the case
of any individual death which has not been reported, there was in fact a need for an
investigation. All the coroner can do is act upon information which is given to him/her.
7.114 The present arrangements by which deaths are reported to coroners are unsatisfactory.
They vary from place to place. Doctors find them difficult to apply. The system largely
depends on the willingness of doctors to report deaths. The Inquiry has heard that some
doctors never report a death to the coroner. It seems unlikely that this is because no death
certified by them should have been reported. It may be that they do not know when a death
should be reported. It may be that the doctor has personal objections to the autopsy
process. It is likely that in many cases the doctor is seeking to spare families the ordeal of
a report to the coroner and a possible autopsy. Registrars are not well equipped to make a
decision on whether a death should be reported. Shipman was able to evade the coronial
system almost completely. A way must be found to ensure that all deaths receive a degree
of scrutiny and investigation, appropriate to their facts and circumstances. Even some
deaths that might currently be treated as ‘natural’ deaths might warrant detailed
investigation. One example might be where it appears that there is an increasing
prevalence of a particular illness in a particular district. Another is where, for example, an
otherwise healthy individual succumbs to an illness that is not normally fatal. It may well
be of interest to the family and the wider public at large to know why that individual
succumbed and what, if anything, can be done to prevent the same thing happening
again.
7.115 Under the current arrangements, once a death is reported, the coroner must first take a
decision as to whether s/he has jurisdiction, i.e. jurisdiction to order an autopsy and/or
hold an inquest. I have several concerns about the way decisions on jurisdiction are taken
by coroners or their officers. First, the decisions are taken far too informally. The
information on which the decision is based is taken down over the telephone by a
coroner’s officer who usually has no medical training and very little medical knowledge. If
178
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the death raises issues of any medical complexity, there is obviously a danger that the full
picture will not be captured. The doctor is not required to put anything in writing or to
produce any extract from the medical records. Instead of an informal account provided
over the telephone, the coroner should, in my view, receive written information about the
circumstances of the death from the health professional who has certified the fact of death.
He or she should also receive written information about the deceased’s medical history
from a doctor with recent knowledge of it.
7.116 Second, the amount of information obtained depends largely on the extent and nature of
the coroner’s officer’s questions. In some coroner’s offices, I am sure that the questioning
is careful and detailed. Regrettably, in others, only scanty information is obtained.
7.117 Third, the decision as to jurisdiction is, in general, taken on the basis only of what the
reporting doctor says. If the doctor chooses to give a false or incomplete account, the
coroner’s officer, or indeed the coroner, is unlikely to realise. The coroner takes what the
doctor says completely on trust. Usually, there will be no attempt to verify the accuracy of
the information given by the doctor with any other source. As I have said, the doctor will
not be required to produce any part of the medical records. Nor will the coroner’s officer
usually attempt to speak to a relative of the deceased. In my view, it would be far better if
such decisions were based upon a broader knowledge of the death than is usually
available at present. Instead of relying solely on the account of one doctor, information
provided by the doctor or other health professional should be cross-checked with a
member of the deceased’s family or some other person with recent knowledge of the
deceased.
7.118 Of particular concern is the practice followed in some offices of delegating the decision
on jurisdiction to a coroner’s officer. In my view, this practice is of very doubtful legality
under the present Act. In any event, even if lawful, I do not think it is appropriate to allow a
coroner’s officer with no formal training to take such a decision. I have no doubt that many
coroner’s officers are very experienced and take such decisions very conscientiously. But
I am also satisfied that some are inexperienced and take decisions based on scanty
information and sometimes by applying rules of practice or other considerations which do
not reflect the criteria by which the decision should be taken.
7.119 In the main, such decisions entail a decision based on medical judgement. Even when the
decision is taken by the coroner, as opposed to the coroner’s officer, the legally qualified
coroner may be ill equipped to take the decision. Dr Chapman, the only medically
qualified coroner to give oral evidence to the Inquiry, described the way in which medical
knowledge enables a coroner to take an informed part in discussions with doctors about
deaths that may or may not fall within his/her jurisdiction. Some of the legally qualified
coroners agreed that medical experience was required. For example, Mr Pollard said that
it was not appropriate for him, as a lawyer, to take the decision to allow a doctor to certify
the cause of death if the doctor told him that s/he could not say whether the death had
been caused by one of two natural causes. His only option was to order an autopsy. He
felt that this was often not appropriate. His powers were limited. He said that, if the coroner
had more flexible powers and if there were a medically qualified person in the coroner’s
office, it would be possible to avoid unnecessary autopsies. I accept that some legally
179
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
qualified coroners do, after some years of experience, develop considerable expertise in
medical matters. However, many do not. In my view, decisions of this kind should be taken
by medically qualified coroners or, in the more straightforward cases, by coroner’s officers
with some medical background and ready access to expert medical advice.
7.120 There are substantial variations between the practices operated in different coroners’
offices and much variability in the standard of service achieved. It would be desirable to
achieve a measure of consistency of practice and of high standards. To achieve these
ends, there is a need for leadership, organisation and structure in the work of coroners.
Coroners must also receive continuing education and training.
Greater Manchester South District
7.121 Shipman’s practice in Hyde fell within the coronial District of Greater Manchester South.
Once his activities became known, there was some public disquiet that they had not
earlier come to the knowledge of the Coroner for the District, Mr John Pollard. He had, in
fact, first become aware of concern about Shipman in March 1998, when he was
contacted by Dr Linda Reynolds, a local general practitioner. A police investigation
followed, as described in my Second Report, and concluded that there was no substance
in the concerns expressed by Dr Reynolds and others. No suspicions had previously been
awakened within the coroner’s office as a result of the deaths reported, or not reported,
by Shipman. It was therefore necessary for the Inquiry to examine the practices within the
coroner’s office and to ascertain whether the absence of concern about Shipman’s
activities resulted from any fault on the part of the Coroner or his staff.
7.122 The procedures within Mr Pollard’s office have been subjected to close scrutiny by the
Inquiry. The Inquiry obtained a considerable amount of documentation relating to cases
unconnected with Shipman, which had been dealt with by Mr Pollard and his staff. These
cases, chosen at random, have thrown up concerns about decisions on jurisdiction
made in Mr Pollard’s office. I am not critical of individual members of staff, who had
received no training and were no doubt doing their very best to discharge their duties
in difficult circumstances. Nor am I very critical of Mr Pollard himself. He too had little
training and suffered from the various problems which I have already described in this
Chapter. Most significantly, I do not think that the practices within his office were any
different from those in operation in many other coroner’s offices up and down the
country. It may be that, in some coroner’s offices, the decision-making process is based
on a sound understanding of the principles involved and the way in which those
principles should be applied. However, the evidence available to the Inquiry suggests
that this is certainly not always the case. I am confident that a close examination of the
practices in operation in many other coroner’s districts in England and Wales would
reveal shortcomings similar to those which I have described in connection with Greater
Manchester South District.
7.123 Most importantly, I doubt that the practices in operation in Mr Pollard’s office had any
effect on the outcome of those few deaths referred to him where Shipman had killed.
In saying this, I exclude the case of Mrs Renate Overton, which I shall deal with in detail
in Chapter Thirteen; in any event, Mrs Overton’s death occurred during the time of
180
SHIP03$$19 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Mr Pollard’s predecessor, Mr Revington. It is possible that, if the practices followed in
Mr Pollard’s office had been better, the outcome might have been different in those
cases (we have no means of knowing how many, since no record would necessarily
have been kept) where we know that Shipman spoke to the coroner’s office to ‘discuss’
the death. For example, in the case of Mrs Grundy, a coroner’s officer might have
spoken to Mrs Grundy’s daughter, Mrs Angela Woodruff, before giving ‘permission’ for
Shipman to certify the death as due to ‘old age’. However, the practice in the coroner’s
office can have had no effect on the vast majority of the killings, which never came to
the Coroner’s notice at all.
181
SHIP03P007 25-06-03 12:07:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Role of the Coroner’s Officer
Introduction
8.1 In Chapter Seven, I dealt in detail with the position of coroners in England and Wales and
mentioned the role performed by their officers. In this Chapter I shall expand upon the role
played by coroner’s officers. It will become apparent that there is an enormous degree of
variation in the tasks performed by those who work on behalf of the coroners and that there
is a lack of uniformity with regard to their employment terms, conditions and
circumstances. There is also no consistency in the nomenclature of the posts that they
hold. By way of illustration, the coroner’s officers who work in the office of Mr John Pollard,
HM Coroner for the Greater Manchester South District, are essentially secretarial or
clerical staff. In some districts, the coroner’s officer has an investigative role. Mr Pollard
also has available to him the services of coroner’s liaison officers (CLOs), who are
employed by the Greater Machester Police (GMP), albeit in a civilianised post, and who
perform some enquiries of an investigative nature on Mr Pollard’s behalf. Other such
enquiries are performed by GMP officers.
Historical Background
8.2 It has long been recognised that, in order to fulfil the many functions ancillary to his/her
office, the coroner needs support and assistance. In 1893, the Select Committee on Death
Certification explained the position at that time:
‘The preliminary inquiries in a case referred to a coroner are usually
made by his officer, who frequently is a parish beadle or police officer.
In practice it is not unusual for it to be left to this official to decide after
his own personal inquiries in the matter, whether an inquest is
necessary. He also, in some cases, has the selection of the witnesses to
be called, and it sometimes happens that a coroner does not know what
witnesses are coming before him until they are called.
It may be doubted whether this important part of the work connected
with a coroner’s inquiry should be entrusted to an official who cannot be
expected to possess the requisite qualifications for its proper
performance.’
8.3 In 1971, the Brodrick Committee described the coroner’s officer as occupying the position
of ‘general factotum’ in the coroner service. The Committee’s view was that the coroner
service had undergone a shift away from its concentration on crime towards a wider
medical and social function, with the result that many of the tasks performed by the
coroner’s officer should not be performed by police officers. The Committee
commissioned a survey, which was carried out by the Organisation and Methods Branch
of the Home Office. The overwhelming majority of coroner’s officers at that time were found
to be serving police officers, seconded to serve the coroner. The paradox of the officer
183
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
being employed by the police but controlled by the coroner was noted, as were the
possible problems that might flow from this arrangement.
8.4 The Brodrick Committee recommended that police officers should no longer serve in the
capacity of coroner’s officers and that the involvement of police officers in that role should
gradually be phased out. This fitted in with their view of the shift in function of the coroner
service. It also fitted in with the Committee’s intention that there should be greater reliance
on doctors for the reporting of deaths and its expectation that there would be a
corresponding reduction in the investigative function of the coroner and his officer.
However, as with other recommendations of the Brodrick Committee, no substantive
changes were made in the arrangements for coroner’s officers.
8.5 In 1985, a further survey by the Organisation and Methods Branch of the Home Office on
the work of coroner’s officers was circulated by the Home Office to coroners, chief
executives of county councils, chief officers of police and others concerned. This echoed
the Brodrick Committee’s recommendation that police coroner’s officers should be
replaced by civilian staff employed by local authorities. The Home Office Steering
Committee was of the view that this step would enable police officers to be re-deployed
on work more relevant to their police powers and training.
Recent Developments
8.6 In 1998, the Home Office published Research Study 181 on the Coroner Service,
undertaken by Mr Roger Tarling. The Study recorded a gradual shift towards full
civilianisation of the post of coroner’s officer. However, it also recorded that, although
many posts were civilianised, the majority of post-holders were former police officers. The
Study noted that very little formal training was provided for coroner’s officers, apparently
on the grounds that little was needed because of the officers’ previous employment. In all
the police areas surveyed, training was provided ‘on the job’ by ‘shadowing’ a coroner’s
officer, usually the present incumbent of the post. Only ten of the 40 police forces who
responded stated that they provided their officers with written guidance as to how to
perform their duties. Although it was recorded that most police forces intended to continue
to provide coroner’s officers, this was not universal. There was noted to be a tension in
some areas about who ‘owned’ the coroner’s officers and who had the final say in directing
their work. The Study identified a shift towards direct employment by the local authority or
the coroner.
8.7 As a result of the publication of the Tarling Study, the Association of Chief Police Officers
(ACPO) General Policing Committee set up a small working group to consider the issues
raised in the Study. The conclusion of that group was that responsibility for the
employment of coroner’s officers should no longer rest with the police, but should be
assumed by local authorities. It confirmed that the degree of responsibility conferred on
coroner’s officers, and the tasks required of them, varied significantly from one force to
another and were very ‘ad hoc’. The group found it impossible to obtain a clear or
consistent picture of what roles and functions had been handed over to local authorities
and what residual tasks had been left with police forces. The training needs of coroner’s
officers, said the group, had to be addressed. Training at that time was still ‘on the job’.
184
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
8.8 The variation in provision throughout the country at this time is well illustrated by work done
by Mrs Christine Hurst, the senior coroner’s officer for Cheshire. In 1999, she produced a
report entitled ‘Survey of Standardisation of Duties and Practices of Coroner’s Officers in
England and Wales’. Upon assuming her post some time earlier, she had set about
assessing how the practice of coroner’s officers in Cheshire might be standardised. As
part of that task, she circulated a questionnaire to coroner’s officers all over the country.
She received 200 replies which formed the basis of her survey.
8.9 The survey revealed that 184 coroner’s officers were employed by police authorities and
15 by county councils. One did not know by whom s/he was employed. One hundred and
fourteen coroner’s officers were based at police stations, 36 in council offices and the rest
in hospitals, the coroner’s office or in solicitors’ offices (presumably the offices of part-time
coroners). The majority of coroner’s officers received a salary of between £15,000 and
£18,000 a year. One hundred were on a paid on-call rota, four were on unpaid on-call rota.
Ninety six were not expected to work out of hours but almost half of these could be
contacted at home out of hours and at weekends for advice and assistance in cases
involving organ donation; some also attended the scene of road traffic accident deaths
out of hours. Although the majority of coroner’s officers have no formal medical training,
176 coroner’s officers reported that they examined hospital medical notes during the
investigation of deaths occurring in hospital. About 40 said that they attended all
autopsies. Almost all had attended at least one autopsy. The most common tasks
performed were the formal identification of the deceased, the completion of a report form
for the coroner and/or pathologist, the taking of witness statements and some duties akin
to those performed in a civil or criminal court by the court clerk or usher. A relatively high
number, 152 in total, sometimes attended the scene of a death, whether at the time of the
initial report or subsequently.
8.10 It is clear from this brief analysis of these various reports and surveys that the current
arrangements in relation to the provision of coroner’s officers are far from satisfactory. The
shift in the coroner service from concentration on crime towards a wider medical and
social function noted by the Brodrick Committee has, in my view, continued. Yet there is
still, in some areas especially, a tendency to appoint, without providing further relevant
training, retired police officers who have only a layman’s understanding of medical issues
and no real experience of investigation or file preparation.
8.11 In a letter to the Inquiry, Mr John Coopey, Chairman of the Coroner’s Officers Association,
explained that the reason for the setting up of the Association in 1997 was a perception
on the part of coroner’s officers that, following civilianisation of the role of coroner’s officer,
the lack of formal recognition by the Home Office of their role and the absence of
structured training were operating to prevent coroner’s officers from providing an
adequate and uniform level of service. Although the Association has now been
recognised by the Home Office and although it organises regular training days,
Mr Coopey says that there is scope for considerable improvement. The Association
advocates fundamental changes to the coroner service.
Inquiry Evidence: Training
8.12 Mrs Hurst is the Deputy Chairman of the Coroner’s Officers Association. I was impressed
during her oral evidence by Mrs Hurst’s obvious enthusiasm for her work. In her capacity
185
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
as Deputy Chairman, she has been instrumental in setting up national continuing
education and training programmes for coroner’s officers. The Coroner’s Officers
Association, with a membership of only about 120, has, until recently, had to organise
such training itself and has had to fund it from subscriptions. Mrs Hurst said that funds
available for training are very limited, although lectures are given by speakers from
outside the Coroner’s Officers Association and some funding from the Home Office has
been promised. Mrs Hurst recently collaborated in setting up a four-day course in
Liverpool, adapted for the needs of coroner’s officers from a Regional Health Authority
course for medical coders. Medical coders are employed to interpret medical records and
code diseases and medical procedures for epidemiological and other purposes. The
object of the adapted course was to instruct coroner’s officers in basic medical
terminology. Mrs Hurst told me also of another course for coroner’s officers, set up at the
instigation of ACPO, at Teesside University. She has hopes and plans for the further
development of more comprehensive courses.
8.13 Whilst it is commendable that Mrs Hurst and the Coroner’s Officers Association have taken
these initiatives, it is disappointing (and an undoubted product of the fragmented
arrangements that currently exist) that such initiatives had first to come from the
Association and not from, for example, the Home Office. I heard evidence, from various
sources, of difficulties for many coroner’s officers in securing funding to attend such
courses. This problem results, in part at least, from the fact that coroner’s officers work for
the coroner but are very often employed by the police.
8.14 I heard evidence about a two-week training course provided by the GMP following the
civilianisation of the coroner’s officer post in 1998, which focussed on the relevant areas
of law and issues such as grief counselling, interviewing witnesses, statement taking and
file preparation. Those issues are, of course, very relevant to the work of the coroner’s
officer. However, the course did not offer any medical instruction, even though the majority
of those attending had no medical background.
Inquiry Evidence: Variability of Support
8.15 The following description of the position in five areas illustrates the variability in the nature,
extent and quality of support available to coroners from their coroner’s officers.
Surrey
8.16 Mr Michael Burgess, HM Coroner for Surrey, has nine civilian coroner’s officers, employed
by the police. Three are ex-police officers and the others come from different employment
backgrounds. These officers work out of four separate police stations and one hospital.
Neither they nor the Coroner have any clerical or administrative support; all accounting
work is done by the local authority.
8.17 The job description for the Surrey coroner’s officer requires the officer to assist the Coroner
and to enquire into specified categories of deaths, to arrange and manage inquests and
to present witnesses, reports and statements to enable the Coroner to arrive at a verdict.
All Mr Burgess’ officers perform an investigative role. Although they are under no
186
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
obligation to attend deaths that occur or are reported outside normal office hours,
Mr Burgess said that they tend to do so out of a sense of professional responsibility.
Although it might have been expected that the former police officers would be most skilled
in investigative work, his experience is that it is a former paramedic who stands out. The
police officers who work for him had attained only a relatively junior rank in the police force
and had acquired little experience of forensic investigative techniques.
8.18 Mr Burgess’ officers do not normally attend the scene of a crime under investigation by
the police. They do, however, attend the hospital or mortuary where the body is being held
and liaise between the police and the coroner over the arrangements for the autopsy.
Otherwise, they have no role during a criminal investigation and only a small role, if any,
in the police investigation of a road traffic accident death.
8.19 In cases where there is no suspicion of criminal wrongdoing, the extent of the officers’
involvement is variable. For example, in the case of the discovery of a body in
circumstances suggestive of suicide, the police will attend, but their investigation ends if
they exclude the possibility of third party involvement. The case is then taken over by the
coroner’s officers, who will make enquiries of witnesses and seize anything of evidential
value.
8.20 The job description for Mr Burgess’ coroner’s officers states that it is desirable that the
post-holder should understand, or have the ability to acquire an understanding of,
medical procedures and terminology. In common with the practice in many other
coroners’ offices, however, many of Mr Burgess’ officers have no medical background
and the way in which they acquire an understanding of medicine is by ‘learning on the job’,
by looking in medical dictionaries and by seeking help, when available, from Mr Burgess’
assistant deputy coroners, who are medically qualified. Mr Burgess said that there is
some cross-fertilisation of skills between his officers; no doubt the presence of a
paramedic in his team is of some value. Mr Burgess said that he had perceived an
increase in the number of deaths reported to his office that require some form of
investigation into a medical mishap or an allegation of lack of medical or nursing care. It
is clear that there is an increasing need for medical knowledge for coroner’s officers, just
as was observed by the Brodrick Committee in 1971.
South Yorkshire (West)
8.21 Mr Christopher Dorries, HM Coroner for South Yorkshire (West), has three coroner’s
officers, two based in Sheffield and one in Barnsley. Two are serving police officers and
the third is a retired police officer. The office has the benefit of separate administrative and
secretarial support. Mr Dorries’ officers are paid by the police but their expenses are
reimbursed by the relevant local authorities.
8.22 Unlike Mr Burgess’ coroner’s officers, Mr Dorries’ officers are office-bound and the
burden of their office duties is such that there is, according to Mr Dorries, no prospect of
their being able to visit a scene of death or to take statements, save in the most exceptional
case. The effect of this is that, although the officers are or have been serving police
officers, they do no investigative work and the skills required for their job are not what
would traditionally be regarded as police skills.
187
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
8.23 All investigations are carried out for the Coroner by serving police officers of the South
Yorkshire Police. Mr Dorries acknowledges that the investigations and the reports upon
them are of variable quality and he has no direct control over how the work is done. It is,
however, always open to him to revert to the reporting officer where necessary.
Nottinghamshire
8.24 Dr Nigel Chapman, HM Coroner for Nottinghamshire, has six coroner’s officers under his
jurisdiction, provided and employed by the City Council. They include two ex-police
officers, but otherwise come from a variety of non-medical employment backgrounds,
including school secretaries and the former manager of a cotton mill. As with Mr Dorries,
Dr Chapman’s officers perform no investigative role. This is undertaken by the police. The
coroner’s officers might discuss an investigation with the police and report back to the
Coroner. As a result, the police might be asked to carry out further investigations.
However, that is the limit of the coroner’s officers’ investigative role in Nottinghamshire.
8.25 Dr Chapman also reported that the quality of investigation by police officers attending the
scene of the death was variable. He was of the view that it would be far preferable if
investigating officers were answerable directly to him, rather than to their police
employers.
Cheshire
8.26 The evidence relating to Cheshire came from Mrs Hurst. Mrs Hurst has been a coroner’s
officer since 1993. She had previously trained and worked as a nurse and medical
secretary. When she first began working as a coroner’s officer, she was given no specific
training and felt particularly ill equipped for those areas in which she had no relevant
experience, such as taking statements and the other investigative aspects of her job. On
the other hand, she observed (accurately, I am sure) that she was at a considerable
advantage over some police officers who were at that time in post and who did not have
a good grasp of the medical issues with which they frequently had to grapple. Mrs Hurst
expressed the view that a proper system of death investigation required a blend of skills
that would be offered by a team with different backgrounds and experience. Mrs Hurst
said that, in her capacity as Deputy Chairman of the Coroner’s Officers Association, she
had observed the growing trend towards recruitment of candidates from a non-police
background.
8.27 The work of the coroner’s officers, as carried out in Cheshire, is largely of an investigative
nature. The coroner’s officer receives reports of deaths from police officers. I have already
observed in Chapter Four that the sudden death report form used by the Cheshire
Constabulary is more comprehensive than that used by the GMP and many other police
forces and I think that the actual system of reporting is correspondingly more robust. The
coroner’s officer checks the contents of the form and often speaks to a doctor about some
aspect of the medical history. He or she also often speaks to a relative of the deceased to
check or supplement some aspect of the information about the circumstances of the
death. He or she takes that opportunity to discover whether the deceased’s family has any
concern about the death or about any medical treatment given. He or she liaises with
188
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
families over arrangements for autopsies and their results. He or she frequently has to
examine medical records when investigating a death in hospital. Plainly, Mrs Hurst’s
medical background is invaluable when she undertakes these tasks. It was clear from
Mrs Hurst’s description of the way in which she works that, unlike many other coroner’s
officers, she undertakes investigations for the coroner both before and after he has made
his decision whether to accept that he has jurisdiction over the death.
8.28 Mrs Hurst said that the Cheshire Coroner’s office is somewhat understaffed and that such
understaffing is a common problem, resulting possibly from the uncertainty as to who will
in future take over the responsibility for coroner’s officers. Because of this understaffing,
Mrs Hurst performs a ‘hands on’ role, as well as the supervisory role required of her as
senior coroner’s officer.
Greater Manchester South
8.29 Procedures in the office of Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner for Greater Manchester South
District, appear to differ significantly from those in place elsewhere in the country. As I
briefly mentioned at the beginning of this Chapter, those whom he describes as his
coroner’s officers perform no investigative role. They deal with telephone reports of deaths
and queries from doctors, registrars and members of the public. They generally started
work in the office as clerk/typists and gained promotion to the position of coroner’s officer
when those previously so employed retired or left. The staff received no training but
learned the job by following the example set by their seniors. None had any medical
expertise, other than that picked up in post. No written advice or guidance was available
until February 1999, when the then first coroner’s officer, Mrs Joan Collins, assembled
some information sheets for the newly appointed third coroner’s officer. However, these
have since become out of date and, when Mr Pollard gave evidence in November 2002,
had not been up-dated or used for some time. On taking up his position in 1995, Mr Pollard
made no formal enquiry into the procedures operated by his staff but said in oral evidence
that, in order to ensure that his staff were on the right lines, he contented himself with
listening to one side of telephone conversations, as he moved about the office.
8.30 Until 1998, Mr Pollard had available to him also the services of a small number of police
coroner’s officers, who were serving police officers, seconded to work for the Coroner.
These posts were civilianised in 1998 and the job title became ‘coroner’s liaison officer’.
Mr Pollard now has three such officers working for him, one for each of the three police
divisions within his coronial district. All are former police officers. Two work from police
stations and the third, the Tameside (G Division) CLO, is nominally based at Ashton police
station but spends most of his time at the Tameside General Hospital mortuary.
8.31 There has been some confusion in the GMP area as to the extent to which CLOs should
perform investigative work. Prior to civilianisation, the police coroner’s officers’ job
description included the investigation and reporting of sudden death. Since 1998,
however, the job description describes an essentially administrative function, with police
officers carrying out the investigative role. It is not at all clear whether the CLO has or has
not an investigative role. Mr Pollard said that the CLO’s job ‘has remained something of a
mystery to many people’ following civilianisation. In practice, the responsibilities attaching
189
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
to the post do not seem to have changed significantly, if at all, since 1998. Mr Pollard said
that, when opening an inquest, he tells the CLO what investigation he wants and the CLO
attends to it. He told the Inquiry that some officers regard the post as involving
administration, liaison and preparation for the coroner of information that has been
gathered by others. Other officers take a far more proactive view and will undertake
investigations largely upon their own initiative.
8.32 The current CLO for G Division is Mr Christopher Gaines. He was appointed in April 1998
and was the first divisional appointment to the newly civilianised post. He had previously
retired from the police force in 1994 on the grounds of ill health. His police experience had
been mainly in the performance of uniformed, non-investigative duties. He had had limited
experience of preparing and submitting police investigation files. He has had no medical
training; he told the Inquiry that he has purchased a medical dictionary and looks up the
meaning of medical terms where he is unsure. For the investigation of deaths in G Division,
therefore, Mr Pollard is dependent upon a retired police officer who undertook little
investigative work before retirement and who has no medical background or training.
There is no opportunity for any cross-fertilisation of skills, since Mr Gaines works largely
alone. Mr Pollard acknowledged that Mr Gaines would find medical training of use in
respect of much of the work he has to carry out.
8.33 Mr Gaines explained that, of 11 GMP appointees to CLO posts in 1998, all but three had
formerly been police officers. He said that his workload has become so great that he
requires assistance. He has now been provided with an assistant, who is a police officer
with some 14–15 years’ experience but no medical training or other training specific to his
responsibilities as an assistant to the CLO. It is likely that this assistant will replace
Mr Gaines’ current deputy, Police Constable (PC) Peter Napier, in due course.
8.34 Mr Gaines spends most of his time at Tameside General Hospital mortuary but maintains
frequent contact with Ashton police station. Although he carries out some investigative
work, many of his duties are of a purely clerical nature. His working day normally begins
with the collection and checking of the police reports of sudden death forms deposited
in the mortuary overnight or over the weekend. He might expect to find between eight
and twelve such forms on a Monday morning and between one and three such forms
on other weekdays. Until July 2001, it was his practice to ascertain from the deceased’s
general practitioner whether s/he was in a position to certify the cause of death, but this
task is now performed by the coroner’s officers based in Mr Pollard’s office. Mr Gaines
faxes Forms 751 and 751A to the coroner’s office and leaves the original Form 751A
at the mortuary for the pathologist. During his working day, Mr Gaines will
undertake interviews of the next of kin of a deceased and witness the identification of
the body.
8.35 During the morning, Mr Gaines travels to Ashton police station, where he liaises with his
former police colleagues and collects messages from his internal electronic mail system.
He then goes to the coroner’s office in Stockport to open inquests, transfer files and
discuss cases with the Coroner. There is no fixed time for the opening of inquests and
between one and six inquests might be opened at one time. Mr Gaines swears an oath,
confirming the correctness of the information that he puts before the Coroner, which
190
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
includes Form 751 and any witness statements. He will receive instructions from the
Coroner as to any enquiries he is to make or witness statements he is to take. Mr Gaines
very rarely attends autopsies, although he might occasionally be called in by the
pathologist, if the latter wishes something to be drawn to the attention of the Coroner.
When he attends inquests, he does so as a facilitator or link between the witnesses, the
family and the Coroner.
8.36 In respect of hospital deaths, Mr Gaines’ duties are very limited. He receives reports of
hospital deaths from the coroner’s office. At the mortuary, he will ensure that the body
has been properly identified and will complete Form 751, in effect repeating the
information that he has been given by the staff in the coroner’s office who will, in turn,
have received that information from the hospital. Of course, although Form 751 is a GMP
‘Report of Sudden Death’, the police are not involved in the report of the death and
Mr Gaines is not a police officer. Presumably, the GMP form is used because no
alternative form has been devised and produced by the coroner’s office. The extent of
Mr Gaines’ involvement, apart from repeating that which he has learnt from the coroner’s
office, is to fill in the details of the deceased’s general practitioner and certain other
information concerning the next of kin. His role is, therefore, almost entirely clerical and,
given his lack of medical training, it could hardly be expected to be otherwise. Mr Gaines
would not normally visit parts of the hospital other than the mortuary, except occasionally
to take a witness statement from a member of staff when, for example, a deceased has
previously suffered an injury on a ward.
8.37 PC Napier is Mr Gaines’ deputy. He first deputised in 1990 for the erstwhile police
coroner’s officer, Police Constable (PC) Theresa King, who retired in 1997. He was the
police coroner’s officer himself, between 1997 and 1998, until civilianisation. He is still
a serving police officer. During Mr Gaines’ absence, PC Napier ‘holds the fort’ but he
can do no more than that because he has other responsibilities as the police warrants
officer. PC Napier has no medical training at all and the only instruction he has had with
regard to the fulfilment of his duties was when working alongside PC King and thereafter
‘on a casual basis’. PC King had no medical training. In a statement to the Inquiry, PC
Napier expressed the view that access to medical advice is not necessary for his role,
a comment which may well be accurate insofar as it relates to the role as he performs
it. However, I am quite sure that a degree of medical knowledge and access to medical
advice would be extremely valuable to coroner’s officers performing the type of role that
might be expected of them by many coroners. Mr Pollard readily accepted this.
Comment
8.38 Without intending any disrespect to the coroner’s officers or CLOs whose work I have
described, it is abundantly clear that there is an urgent need for change in the provision of
suitable and properly trained support staff for coroners. Although the advantages of close
contact with the police must be recognised and maintained, the time has come to accept
that police officers or former police officers are often not well suited or equipped to carry
out the wide range of functions which a coroner’s officer ought to perform. To a large
extent, the evidence gathered by the Inquiry has only served to confirm that which had
already been recognised, as I shall shortly explain.
191
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Inquiry Evidence: the Employment Position of Coroner’s Officers
8.39 Problems flowing from the split responsibility for the employment of coroner’s officers
between local authorities and the police have been acknowledged in the past and were
confirmed by numerous witnesses who gave evidence to the Inquiry.
8.40 Mr Burgess, who is also the Honorary Secretary of the Coroners’ Society and has
knowledge of practice in many parts of the country, confirmed that a number of police
forces have sought to divest themselves of responsibility for coroner’s officers. In his
district, tensions arise because his officers are employed and paid by the police but work
for him. Employment law and health and safety issues arise out of this hybrid status. He is
not troubled by the fact that, although in charge of the investigation of a non-criminal
death, he cannot ultimately direct those who are investigating it; however, I can easily
envisage how problems could arise.
8.41 Mr Pollard said that tensions can arise because he cannot require his CLOs, who are
employed by the GMP in a ‘civilianised’ post, always to act in accordance with his wishes.
For example, he has recently been unable to insist that one of them attend a training
course organised by the Coroner’s Officers Association. Moreover, there are problems
with deputising cover on G Division, in that PC Napier, the deputising officer for Mr Gaines,
is still a serving police officer with other duties to perform when he is standing in as CLO.
8.42 Mrs Hurst said in terms that she finds it ‘quite a difficult situation to be in’, being employed
by the police but working for the coroner.
Recognition of the Need for Change
8.43 I described in paragraph 8.7 above the findings of the small ACPO working group, set up
following publication of the Tarling Study in 1998. The findings of the working group were
brought to the attention of the Home Office Coroner Service Consultative Committee
(CSCC) in 1999. This Committee is chaired by a representative of the Home Office and
consists of representatives of the various Government Departments and agencies with a
responsibility for, or an interest in, the coroner service. The Home Office invited views from
the Association of Police Authorities and the Local Government Association. Although
both bodies accepted that there was a case in principle for a transfer of responsibility for
employment of coroner’s officers from the police to local authorities, they could not agree
on funding arrangements. In the meantime, the Home Office proposed to the CSCC that
yet further work would be helpful in clarifying the duties of coroner’s officers and a Working
Party with wide Terms of Reference relative to the role of coroner’s officers was
established in early 2001. The Working Party consisted of representatives of the Home
Office, the Coroners’ Society, ACPO, the Metropolitan Police, the Local Government
Association and the Coroner’s Officers Association.
8.44 At about the same time, in the summer of 2001, the Coroners Review was established. The
CSCC Working Party considered whether there was still a need for it to report and decided
that there was. In April 2002 it provided its report entitled ‘Report on the Provision of
Coroners’ Officers’ to the CSCC. The Home Office accepted the report and, on 30th August
2002, issued it together with Home Office Circular 46/2002.
192
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
8.45 I do not propose to lengthen this Report by a detailed discussion of the findings and
recommendations of the CSCC Working Party. Suffice it to say that they have undertaken
the first ever detailed nationwide analysis of the work which is and should be done by a
coroner’s officer. Of course, their report is based upon the existing law relating to coroners
and the deaths that they investigate and I shall make recommendations for changes in that
law. However, there is a great deal in the Working Party’s report that is valuable and will
remain so, whatever changes are made to the coronial system. Any new system will
depend heavily for its successful operation upon a well-trained and properly resourced
cadre of coroner’s officers.
8.46 The Working Party identified seven main functional areas of responsibility of the coroner’s
officer. These are administration, medical investigation, forensic investigation, the
gathering of evidence and the taking of statements, family liaison, inquest duties and
public relations. The report demonstrates that the members of the Working Party have a
wealth of experience of what is entailed in the work and what is required to provide proper
support for coroners and a suitable service to the public, especially the bereaved.
8.47 The report lays particular stress upon the need for training and adequate resources.
I endorse the views expressed. I note also that the report envisages the provision of an ‘out
of hours’ service. As I mentioned in Chapter Four, there is at present no service primarily
responsible for dealing with deaths in the community, whether they occur in or out of
normal working hours. In my view, there should be such a service and coroner’s officers
should provide it.
8.48 The report also advocates the recruitment of officers with a police or medical background
(though not exclusively so) and suggests that a balance of such experience should be
available within a coroner’s district. I agree. Induction training and continuing education
will be needed.
8.49 The report recognises the need for close co-operation between the police and the coroner
service but also advocates a clear division between the tasks that are to be performed by
coroner’s officers and those to be performed by police officers. These tasks will vary
according to the nature of the death under investigation. For example, the police will
plainly be responsible for the investigation of crime. However, once suspicion of
criminality has been ruled out, coroner’s officers should take responsibility for
investigating the death. The police should continue to play a major role in the handling of
disasters and multiple fatalities. The police should have no role to play in the administrative
duties connected with inquests or many of the other miscellaneous duties performed by
coroner’s officers under the direction of the coroner. Coroner’s officers alone should
perform the administrative duties involved in the case of deaths occurring abroad.
8.50 The authors of the report considered that it was not possible, on the basis of the
information or research available, to assess the number of officers that an individual
coroner might need. A list of key criteria, including numbers of deaths reported, numbers
of inquests held, geography and topography and the availability of administrative and
clerical support, was drawn up. I agree that it is not yet possible to estimate how many
coroner’s officers will be needed and would add that the uncertainty in this regard will be
193
SHIP03$$20 25-06-03 12:12:29 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
increased by any changes in the coronial system. However, it seems inevitable that there
must be a substantial increase on the present provision.
8.51 The report recognised the need for adequate provision of transport and equipment and I
endorse the relevant recommendations. I also endorse their suggestion that standard
operating procedures or service level agreements should be negotiated to manage the
interface between coroner’s officers and the police.
8.52 In summary, this report will be an invaluable aid to those charged with the task of
organising a service that will provide proper administrative and investigative support for
coroners in the future.
Conclusions
8.53 The functions of coroner’s officers vary from district to district. It is inevitable that the
service they provide must also be of variable quality. It appears that, everywhere, the
coroner would benefit from the support of a team of well-trained officers, preferably drawn
from a wider variety of backgrounds than is presently the case. If the coroner were further
able to direct and manage their work and working conditions, many of the current
inadequacies would be avoided.
8.54 Fortunately, a great deal of preparatory work has already been done towards the
standardisation of the role of the coroner’s officer. The duties have been analysed and the
need for training fully established. The need for close co-operation with, but clear
demarcation from, the police has been recognised. Provided the resources can be made
available, there is no reason why the performance of coroner’s officers should not be
greatly improved. For too long, coroner’s officers have been expected to perform tasks
requiring the application of skills which they do not possess and in which they have not
been trained. It is likely that they will have to assume an enhanced role under a new
coronial system to be recommended by the Coroners Review and by this Inquiry.
Accordingly, the provision of such resources will become an urgent necessity.
8.55 I have in mind that each coroner should have a team of support staff, some of whom will
be trained in investigative work. Others will supply administrative support. All will require
appropriate training. I shall describe my proposals in greater detail later in this Report.
194
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER NINE
Coroners’ Investigations and Inquests
Introduction
9.1 In Chapter Seven, I discussed the ways in which deaths are reported to the coroner. I also
considered the ways in which (and the material upon which) the decision as to whether
the coroner has jurisdiction over the death is taken. I shall now go on to consider the quality
ofthe investigations carried out by and on behalfofthe coroner once the decision has
been taken that the death comes within the coroner’s jurisdiction.
9.2 I have already mentioned that standards within coroners’ offices in England and Wales
appear to be very variable. I have no doubt that there are districts where investigations,
both medical and circumstantial, are careful and thorough. However, even in those
districts, the way in which investigations are undertaken is necessarily constrained by the
legal framework within which coroners operate. I shall explain the reason for that
constraint, and the respects in which it is undesirable, shortly.
9.3 I have already explained in Chapter One that, because Shipman’s practice in Hyde fell
within the coronial District ofGreater Manchester South, it was necessary for the Inquiry
to examine in detail the practices and procedures in operation within the office of Mr John
Pollard, the Coroner for that District.
9.4 Disregarding the investigations and inquests which took place after Shipman’s arrest, only
a small number ofdeaths among those 508 cases for which I provided a decision in my
First Report or for which Shipman was convicted, were reported to the Coroner. Even
fewer were followed by an autopsy and/or inquest. Of those deaths where Shipman had
killed the deceased, autopsies were performed only in the cases of Mrs Renate Overton
and Mr Charles Barlow and, in both cases, the Coroner certified the cause ofdeath on the
basis ofthe autopsy findings, using the Form 100B procedure. Consideration by the
Inquiry ofthe cases ofMrs Overton and Mr Barlow revealed cause for concern that the
investigations in those cases had not been carried out with a sufficient degree of care or
thoroughness.
9.5 Mrs Overton’s death, in April 1995, was reported by Dr Rachel Pyburn, a doctor working
at Tameside General Hospital, where Mrs Overton had been an in-patient for 14 months
following an overdose of diamorphine (or possibly, morphine), administered by Shipman
in February 1994. She had been in a persistent vegetative state throughout that period.
Following an autopsy, the pathologist reported that the cause ofdeath was hypoxic
cerebral degeneration and expressed the view that the death was due to ‘natural causes’.
The then Coroner, Mr Peter Revington, decided not to hold an inquest and certified the
cause ofdeath (using the Form 100B procedure) on the basis ofthe autopsy report.
Despite the fact that Dr Pyburn had alerted the coroner’s officer to the possibility that the
underlying cause ofdeath was the administration ofmorphine in association with an
asthma attack, there was no investigation or explanation as to how Mrs Overton came to
be in a persistent vegetative state. Her death was wrongly attributed to ‘natural causes’. I
shall recount Mrs Overton’s history in detail in Chapter Thirteen ofthis Report.
195
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
9.6 Shipman killed Mr Barlow in November 1995 and, most unusually, reported the death to
the Coroner. When he telephoned the coroner’s office, I suspect that he hoped to be given
permission to certify the cause of death. He probably decided that it was prudent for him
to seek the ‘approval’ ofthe coroner because Mr Barlow had had a hernia operation only
17 days before his death and had recently been discharged home. I suspect that Shipman
told the coroner’s officer when reporting the death that it had not been connected to the
operation. Whatever Shipman said during the telephone call, the coroner’s officer must
have decided that Shipman could not issue an MCCD, so that an autopsy was necessary.
A police officer attended the scene of the death on the Coroner’s behalf. He completed
the sudden death report Form 751. In it, he recorded little about the circumstances ofthe
death. It may be that he did not understand that the purpose ofhis enquiry was to establish
whether the recent operation had contributed to Mr Barlow’s death.
9.7 Following the autopsy, the pathologist reported that the cause ofdeath was
bronchopneumonia due to tracheal compression due to a nodular thyroid goitre.
Thereafter, Mr Pollard, the newly-appointed Coroner (he had then been in post for about
four months), decided that an inquest was not necessary and certified the cause of death
on the basis ofthe autopsy report. There was no investigation ofthe circumstances ofthe
death and no detailed consideration ofthe autopsy findings, which were not confirmed by
any histology. Investigation ofthe circumstances would have revealed that Mr Barlow had
not been sufficiently ill when seen two hours before his death for him to have died of
bronchopneumonia. Also, the goitre, said to be the underlying cause ofdeath, had been
present in an unchanged state for many years.
9.8 It was naturally a cause ofsome concern to the Inquiry that the Coroner’s investigations
in these significant cases had been to some extent defective and had missed evidence of
unlawful killing. Unless these two cases were exceptional and the obvious shortcomings in
their investigation attributable only to isolated individual failings, the possibility would exist
that there might be deficiencies in the methods ofinvestigation adopted by coroners
elsewhere. As Stage Two ofPhase Two ofthe Inquiry progressed, I began to realise that
coroners’ investigations are often superficial and I began to understand the reasons why
that is so.
9.9 As I have explained, the Inquiry has concentrated upon the investigation ofthe
procedures followed in the office of the Coroner for the Greater Manchester South District.
The practices and procedures operated by Mr Pollard and his staff have come under
close scrutiny. However, I have no reason to think that the practices and procedures
followed in Mr Pollard’s office are any different from those followed in many other coroner’s
offices throughout the country. Indeed, there is some evidence to suggest that they are
typical. Accordingly, when I criticise these practices and procedures, I do not imply that
the individuals who operated them should be singled out for personal criticism.
The Process of Investigation: the Autopsy
Deciding to Order an Autopsy
9.10 Some deaths are reported to the coroner because the circumstances are such that an
inquest is required, even though the cause ofdeath is clear. For example, there must be
196
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
an inquest into the death of a workman who suffers a crushing head injury in an industrial
accident, because the factual circumstances in which the accident was sustained make
the death unnatural. In such cases, an autopsy may not be necessary; in practice, one is
almost always ordered.
9.11 However, a large number ofdeaths are reported to the coroner because the cause of
death is not known with sufficient certainty. Until further enquiry as to the cause of death
is made, it will not be clear whether or not an inquest will be necessary. Ifthe medical
causes ofdeath are established by an autopsy and appear ‘natural’, there will not usually
be an inquest.
9.12 In the Greater Manchester South District, until the year 2000, the decision to order an
autopsy and the practical arrangements for its conduct were usually made by a coroner’s
officer, without any reference to the Coroner. The decision to order an autopsy was almost
automatic. Although that practice has now stopped and the Coroner himselforders the
autopsy, the result is the same; the decision is, in effect, automatic. There is no
consideration as to whether an autopsy is necessary in a case where the cause ofdeath
is obvious from the appearance ofthe body and the reported circumstances ofthe death.
Nor is there any consideration ofwhether the cause ofdeath could be established without
resorting to a full invasive autopsy.
9.13 This resort to autopsy comes about as a result ofthe legislation. Although a coroner could,
in theory, undertake a wide range ofinvestigations, including an examination ofthe scene
ofdeath, consideration ofmedical records and the taking ofwitness statements, there
must seem to be little point in doing so. Ifthe cause ofdeath cannot be certified by a doctor
issuing an MCCD, the only ways in which the coroner can certify the cause are, first (after
ordering an autopsy under section 19 ofthe Coroners Act 1988), by relying on the cause
ofdeath provided by the pathologist (the Form 100B procedure) or, second, by holding
an inquest. Ifan inquest is to be avoided, there must be an autopsy. It seems that most
coroners consider that as, in virtually every case where there is to be an inquest, an
autopsy will be necessary and, since the autopsy will almost always provide a medical
cause ofdeath, there is little point in undertaking any investigation other than the autopsy.
9.14 There are at least two reasons why I regard this practice as undesirable. First, an autopsy
should really be conducted only when there is a positive reason to do so; the decision
should not be taken ‘by default’. Many people are deeply distressed by the thought that
the body ofa beloved relative is to be ‘invaded’. They will accept it with reluctance ifit is
necessary, but not otherwise. Some religious and ethnic groups are strongly opposed to
such procedures. Orthodox Jews are most anxious to avoid an autopsy, although they
accept that, ifand when the law so demands, it must be done. Muslims take a similar view.
Second, an unnecessary autopsy is a waste ofscarce resources. Although section 19 of
the 1988 Act permits that the autopsy may be carried out by any legally qualified medical
practitioner, in practice the examination is almost always performed by a consultant
histopathologist. Almost all the histopathologists who perform autopsies for coroners are
also employed on NHS contracts to carry out diagnostic work in connection with living
patients at general or teaching hospitals. There is a shortage ofsuitably qualified
histopathologists available to carry out NHS work. The demands ofcoroners place a strain
on the available resources.
197
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
9.15 It follows that it would be preferable, in my view, if coroners had the power to certify the
cause ofa death after some preliminary investigations but without necessarily resorting to
autopsy. There must be many cases in which a coroner with medical knowledge could,
following examination ofmedical records and consideration ofevidence ofthe
circumstances ofthe death, reach a sufficiently confident conclusion about the cause of
death to give a certificate without autopsy. Autopsy would still be necessary in some
cases, but in fewer cases than at present.
9.16 There are other adverse consequences that flow from this automatic resort to autopsy.
Some pathologists devote far less time to coroners’ autopsies than they do to a ‘hospital’
autopsy (that is one undertaken for clinical and/or research purposes with the consent of
the next ofkin or the consent ofthe deceased, given in life), knowing, no doubt, that so
long as they can identify some pathology capable of explaining the death, the cause they
provide will be accepted. Another adverse consequence ofthe automatic resort to
autopsy is that the autopsy report is usually considered by the coroner in isolation rather
than in the context ofother evidence. As a result, its reliability is much impaired. I shall
expand upon this problem below.
Investigations Pending Receipt of the Autopsy Report
9.17 If, having decided that the circumstances of the death may require him/her to hold an
inquest but will not necessarily do so (e.g. because there is uncertainty as to the medical
cause ofdeath), the coroner may order an autopsy under section 19 ofthe 1988 Act. He
or she will provide some background information for the pathologist. It might be thought
that the coroner would also want to gather other evidence to inform the decision that s/he
will have to take when the autopsy report is available. In the Greater Manchester South
District at least, any other evidence which will have been gathered by the time the autopsy
report is available is likely to be very limited indeed.
9.18 When the Coroner for the Greater Manchester South District orders an autopsy in cases
reported by a doctor, the only information usually available to him is the oral account of the
reporting doctor. As that account is given to a coroner’s officer who has no medical
training or expertise, the amount ofinformation recorded is usually very limited and
contains little detail. Ifthe death has been reported, or a preliminary investigation has been
undertaken, by a uniformed police officer completing Forms 751 and 751A, the police
officer will have usually recorded only brief details of what any person who happened to
be available for interview has said. The medical information recorded on the form will
usually be scanty and couched in ‘lay’ terms. The account ofthe circumstances ofthe
death will often fill no more than a line or two. The police officer completing the forms will
have no understanding ofthe purpose ofthe questions or ofthe issues which the Coroner
and pathologist will have to decide, as was the case following the death of Mr Barlow. The
police officer will not know what information is relevant. Upon receipt of the forms, the
coroner’s liaison officer (CLO) will check the forms and complete any boxes left blank. The
CLO will speak to the deceased’s next ofkin to ensure that the particulars ofthe deceased,
such as date ofbirth, are correct but will not interview anyone to find out about the
circumstances ofthe death.
198
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
9.19 I have said that a coroner could, in theory, carry out a wider range ofinvestigations in the
period before the autopsy report is available. Certainly, the coroner could obtain witness
statements from any relevant witness. At present, as I have said in Chapter Seven, s/he
has no power to order the production ofany documents or records, nor is there any power
to enter premises or to seize any property relevant to the investigation. That is not to say
that coroners are unable ever to obtain such records and material prior to the inquest.
They can do so with the consent ofthe person having control ofthe premises, records or
other material. However, in practice, the Coroner for the Greater Manchester South District
does not (and I think most other coroners do not) conduct or authorise any such
investigations before deciding, in the light of the autopsy report, whether to hold an
inquest.
The Autopsy and the Report on the Cause of Death
9.20 Evidence received by the Inquiry has suggested reasons why the autopsy is not the
definitive source of information it is often thought to be. The pathologist who is to conduct
the autopsy may have only very limited information about the deceased and the
circumstances ofdeath before conducting the autopsy. He or she will usually have Form
751A or its local equivalent. Ifthe death has occurred in hospital, and ifthe autopsy is
taking place in the mortuary ofthe same hospital, the pathologist will usually receive the
deceased person’s clinical notes and records. Ifthe death occurred in the community, or
at a hospital other than the one where the autopsy is held, the pathologist will not usually
have any medical records. Even ifthe autopsy is taking place in the hospital where the
deceased died, the medical records are not always examined. Some coroners and their
officers provide high quality information for pathologists and are prepared to make any
further enquiries requested. However, others are less efficient. Coroner’s officers may be
office-bound, may have no investigative role and may be unable to identify or discover
further information which could be of assistance to the pathologist. Remoteness and lack
ofcommunication, as between the coroner and the pathologist, can also be a problem,
particularly with part-time coroners.
9.21 It frequently happens that a pathologist conducting autopsies for a coroner will have a
long list ofsuch procedures to be carried out in one session. Coroners’ autopsies are
additional to the pathologist’s duties for the hospital trust for which s/he works. The
evidence suggests that coroners’ autopsies are sometimes conducted rather quickly and
that best practice is not always followed. For example, to save time, the mortuary
technician may be permitted to open the body and remove the organs before the
pathologist has carried out an external examination. Insufficient time may mean that the
pathologist has no opportunity to inspect the medical records carefully or discuss the
case with clinicians.
9.22 It is not uncommon for a pathologist to feel under pressure to reach a conclusion on the
cause ofdeath without conducting the ancillary tests that should properly form part ofthe
autopsy procedure. The Royal College ofPathologists (RCPath) advises that diagnostic
or confirmatory histopathology should be done in all cases, subject to the requirements of
the Human Tissue Act 1961 and the instructions ofthe coroner. The attitude ofcoroners
to the taking ofsamples for histology varies widely. Some will permit tissue samples to be
199
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
taken for histology in only a few types of case. Such an attitude places the pathologist in
considerable difficulty. Moreover, funding for histology can also be a problem. I shall
discuss these issues further in Chapter Ten of this Report.
9.23 Some pathologists also report that they feel under pressure (whether self-imposed,
imposed by the coroner or imposed by circumstances is not always clear) to find a natural
cause ofdeath, thereby avoiding the need for an inquest. I can understand how such
pressures might arise. Ifthere is to be an inquest, the pathologist will have to attend to give
evidence. That will be time-consuming and possibly very inconvenient for him/her. The
pathologist might think that the relatives ofthe deceased will feel relieved that a natural
cause has been found and would rather not have to go through an inquest. The pathologist
might also have the impression that the coroner would be pleased that a natural cause had
been found. Inquests are very time-consuming for the coroner as well.
9.24 Professor Helen Whitwell, Head of the Forensic Pathology Department at the University of
Sheffield, told the Inquiry that it is commonly recognised that, if a pathologist conducting
a coroner’s autopsy can find evidence ofa condition which can account for the death,
s/he is likely to attribute the death to that cause without undertaking histology to confirm
that cause. Dr Martin Gillett, a consultant histopathologist who frequently carries out
coroners’ autopsies, agreed that further tests might not be ordered where there is
pathology that could account for the death. Professor Whitwell explained that the reasons
for this approach are partly financial and partly related to concerns about the retention of
tissue. Ifthis approach is prevalent, it is particularly likely to lead to mistaken diagnoses
ofthe cause ofdeath in the elderly, who will almost always have some condition that is
capable ofaccounting for death. Mr Barlow’s death is a case in point. The pathologist
found macroscopic signs of bronchopneumonia and, without confirming them by
histology, attributed the cause ofdeath to that cause, citing, as an underlying cause,
tracheal compression due to an enlarged goitre. As I have said, there was no reason to
believe that Mr Barlow’s goitre had changed in the weeks and months before his death.
The pathologist did not know that. He found something that could account for the death
and gave that cause as his opinion. Professor Whitwell said that the only reliable way to
diagnose bronchopneumonia is by histological examination. Macroscopic examination is
unreliable.
9.25 In addition to reaching a conclusion on the cause ofdeath, the pathologist will, ifs/he feels
able to do so, express an opinion as to whether or not the cause ofdeath is ‘natural’; this
is really a question for the coroner to determine. Some findings at autopsy are most likely
to be consistent only with a natural cause; signs ofan aortic aneurysm are a good
example. Some findings, such as a stab wound to the heart, are consistent only with an
unnatural death. However, there are many findings which could be consistent with either a
natural or an unnatural underlying cause ofdeath. Sometimes, ifthe pathologist has been
provided with reliable background information about the circumstances of the death or
has access to the medical records or can discuss the medical history and autopsy
findings with a doctor who has treated the deceased, s/he may be able to reach a safe
conclusion as to the underlying cause ofdeath. Ifs/he can, so much the better.
9.26 Sometimes, a pathologist might express a conclusion about the underlying cause of
death, or say that the cause ofdeath was natural, without any proper basis for such a
200
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
conclusion. The death ofMrs Overton is a case in point. At the time ofher death,
Mrs Overton had been in a persistent vegetative state for 14 months. The findings at
autopsy ofcerebral hypoxic degeneration were wholly predictable. However, such
findings could throw no light on what had happened to cause that condition. The
degeneration could have been caused by a natural event, such as an acute attack of
asthma leading to respiratory arrest, or it could have been due to an unnatural event, such
as near drowning, near suffocation or – as in fact it was – drug overdose. In such
circumstances, only by finding out what had happened to cause Mrs Overton’s respiratory
arrest could a safe conclusion be reached as to the underlying cause of death. No such
information was available to the pathologist. Nonetheless, the pathologist expressed his
opinion that her death was due to natural causes. As I shall explain in Chapter Thirteen,
that conclusion was not well founded on evidence and went well beyond the limit of the
pathologist’s expertise. What the pathologist ought to do in those circumstances is to tell
the coroner that s/he cannot tell what is the real or underlying cause ofdeath from the
autopsy findings and that other enquiries must be made.
9.27 The result ofthe practices and pressures I have described is that the coroner’s autopsy
is not the ‘gold standard’ means ofascertaining the cause ofdeath that it is sometimes
thought to be. In September 2002, the RCPath published a document, ‘Guidelines on
autopsy practice’, to which I shall refer further in Chapter Ten. One of the
recommendations made is that adequate background information about the death should
be made available to the pathologist. I have no doubt that a thorough autopsy, conducted
to the high standards recommended by the RCPath and viewed in the context ofthe
background circumstances, provides the best basis for a decision as to the cause of
death. However, the confident reliance presently placed on hurried and inadequate
autopsies is ill founded especially when such reliance may result in the coroner’s failing
to apply his/her mind to the underlying cause ofdeath; this is what may well have
happened in the case ofMrs Overton.
9.28 The problem is compounded by the lack ofany audit or quality assurance ofcoroners’
autopsies. Concern has been expressed by organisations such as the National
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths about the quality, not only ofautopsies, but
also ofautopsy reports. Some auditing ofthe reports offorensic pathologists has been
introduced. However, there is no such system in place for coroners’ autopsies performed
by consultant histopathologists. Professor Whitwell reported that, where attempts at audit
have been made in the past, some coroners would not consent to reports on their behalf
being used for audit purposes. It would of course have been possible for the reports to
be anonymised so as to protect the confidentiality ofpatients. It seems that the coroners
concerned did not appreciate the value and importance ofthe audit process.
Certifying the Cause of Death on the Basis of the Autopsy Report
9.29 When the coroner receives the pathologist’s report containing the medical cause ofdeath,
s/he is almost bound to accept it at face value. He or she will have no wider evidential
background against which to consider it. Nor do most coroners have the medical
expertise necessary to subject the report to any critical examination. If, in a case where
the coroner has decided to order an autopsy under the provisions ofsection 19 ofthe
201
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Coroners Act 1988, the pathologist furnishes a medical cause of death (particularly if s/he
expresses the view that the death was due to ‘natural causes’), the coroner is likely to
decide not to hold an inquest and will probably certify the cause of death in accordance
with the pathologist’s opinion.
9.30 The cases of Mrs Overton and Mr Barlow illustrate the effects of this practice. In
Mrs Overton’s case, the pathologist reported the immediate cause ofdeath and, without
any proper justification, ascribed the death to ‘natural causes’. The Coroner had very little
other evidence available to him and, on seeing the autopsy report in isolation, accepted
it, apparently without realising that the autopsy had been unable to provide any
explanation as to how Mrs Overton had come to be in a persistent vegetative state. Ifthe
Coroner had obtained evidence from the doctor who had reported the death, had
examined the hospital medical records and had had the medical knowledge necessary
to understand their significance, he would have realised that an inquest was necessary
and that his investigation ought to focus on whether Mrs Overton had been given a single
dose of20mg morphine and, ifso, in what circumstances. Reliance on the autopsy report
and on a pathologist’s opinion that went beyond what was justified by his findings resulted
in the Coroner’s failure to discover the true cause of death.
9.31 Similarly with Mr Barlow, the Coroner relied on the pathologist’s view that death was due to
bronchopneumonia. Ifhe had had the advantage ofa witness statement from Mr Norman
Newton, a neighbour and friend of Mr Barlow who saw him daily, he would have learned
that Mr Barlow was sitting in his chair drinking a cup of coffee only two hours before his
death. Provided that the Coroner had sufficient medical knowledge, he would then have
realised that Mr Barlow’s condition two hours before death was not consistent with a death
from bronchopneumonia. He would also have learned that Mr Barlow’s enlarged goitre
had not, so far as anyone knew, changed for a long time. The cause of death suggested
by the pathologist would then have seemed an unlikely one. The Coroner would have
realised that an inquest was necessary. Further investigations would have been required
and might have revealed the truth.
9.32 These two cases suggest, first, that the results ofan autopsy should be seen in the context
ofthe surrounding evidence and not in isolation. The coroner’s uncritical acceptance ofa
pathologist’s opinion, given without knowledge or understanding ofthe background
circumstances, is a recipe for an erroneous decision. Second, if the coroner is to scrutinise
an autopsy report and test it in the light ofthe surrounding evidence, s/he needs some
medical knowledge. Ifs/he cannot carry out such a scrutiny, s/he is wholly dependent on
the pathologist. In effect, the decision is that of the pathologist, rather than the coroner.
9.33 My overall impression ofthe coroners and some ofthe pathologists about whose practices
I heard is that there is in their minds an expectation that, ifa death is not immediately
identified as ‘suspicious’, it will be found to be due to natural causes; this is certainly the
case in respect ofmany ofthe deaths referred to the coroner because the treating doctor
does not know the cause ofdeath. This expectation seems to lead to the attitude that it will
be to everyone’s satisfaction if a cause of death can be found that will enable the coroner
to certify the cause of death without further delay, cost or inconvenience. It is easy to see
how this attitude can become entrenched. The great majority ofdeaths will, in fact, be
202
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
natural. However, if a coroner’s investigation is to be effective, there must be an everpresent
readiness to keep in mind the possibility that the death might not have been
natural. Quite apart from any question of homicide, the coroner should bear in mind the
possibility that neglect, accident or medical error might have caused or contributed to the
death. Dr James Young, ChiefCoroner for the Province ofOntario, Canada, said that his
coronial investigators are trained to ‘think dirty’, by which he meant that they are trained
to approach each death not with the expectation that there will be ‘something wrong’ but
keeping in mind the worst possibility. It seems to me that such an approach would be
appropriate for coroners and pathologists, as well as investigators. Otherwise, the
expectation that the death will be ‘natural’ may become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The Process of Investigation: Preparation for the Inquest
9.34 As I have explained, in some cases it will be clear from the outset that there must be an
inquest. In others, the coroner will decide, in the light ofthe results ofthe autopsy, that an
inquest is necessary.
9.35 In a case in which there is an autopsy under the provisions ofsection 19, the inquest will
be opened and adjourned soon after the receipt of the autopsy report. In many districts,
it is then that the investigation begins. Sometimes, in an inquest case, the police or some
other investigatory body such as the Health and Safety Executive, will have commenced
an investigation immediately after the death. In this Chapter, I am concerned only with
investigations carried out under the direction ofthe coroner.
9.36 As I have explained in Chapter Eight, the arrangements about who carries out the
investigations on behalf of the coroner in preparation for an inquest vary from district to
district. In some districts, the coroner’s officers undertake no investigations at all; all
investigatory work is carried out by the police. In other districts (and Greater Manchester
South is one), some investigatory work is carried out by the CLOs and some by police
officers, but the coroner’s officers, who work only in the coroner’s office, do none.
The Practice in Greater Manchester South District
9.37 Mr Christopher Gaines, one ofthe District CLOs, described the formal opening ofan
inquest in the Greater Manchester South District. He said that he attends Mr Pollard.
Mr Pollard declares the inquest open and Mr Gaines then swears to his beliefin the truth
ofthe information then available (essentially, that contained in Forms 751 and 751A and
a statement ofidentification). Mr Pollard then adjourns the inquest to some future time.
Mr Pollard said that he regards the formal opening as a public occasion, although the
public is not given notice ofthe event beforehand and it takes place in his room.
9.38 Upon adjourning the inquest, Mr Pollard issues instructions to Mr Gaines as to the
investigations required. These might entail interviewing witnesses and possibly
inspecting the scene ofthe death, albeit several days after the death has occurred.
Typically, Mr Gaines would be asked to obtain an ‘antecedents statement’, meaning a
statement of the life history of the deceased. This would usually be obtained from the next
ofkin or a close relative ofthe deceased. I have seen examples ofsuch statements and
203
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
they are often very detailed in the background history they provide. However, such
statements as I have seen are not always well focussed on the issues likely to arise at
the inquest.
9.39 In addition, Mr Gaines might be asked to take a statement from a nurse or carer from the
nursing home or elderly persons’ home in which the deceased had died. I have the
impression that, although Mr Gaines conducts his enquiries conscientiously, he does not
see his role as a proactive one; he simply records what the witness tells him about the
death, rather than asking searching questions, for example probing why the carer had
done what s/he had done or why the system in the home was as it was. I do not attribute
this to any lack ofinterest on his behalf. Rather, I believe that it is explained by his lack of
any medical or nursing background or training and by the fact that, even when in the police
force, he was mainly engaged on uniformed patrol work, rather than investigative duties.
9.40 Mr Gaines was asked about the way in which he would investigate a death that might have
resulted from industrial disease. He said that he would obtain the antecedent history from
the next ofkin. This would include an attempt to discover whether the deceased had been
exposed to the substance thought to have caused the death. Mr Gaines might discover
that, during his/her lifetime, the deceased had consulted a solicitor in connection with a
claim for damages. In that event, the solicitor would probably hold a statement made by
the deceased, dealing with his/her working life and exposure to the dangerous substance.
However, ifno such statement existed, Mr Gaines might obtain very little information. He
would not attempt to contact a former employer to confirm the fact or circumstances of the
deceased’s employment. The only evidence ofemployment might be based on the
recollections of, say, the middle-aged daughter of the deceased, trying to remember what
her father had told her about his work when she was a child, 40 years earlier. Mr Gaines
would not know anything about the medical evidence that might tend to confirm or refute
the suggestion that the deceased had been exposed to a dangerous substance at work.
9.41 Mr Gaines also described what would happen when he investigated a case ofsuspected
suicide. Usually, the police would be involved until they were satisfied that no third person
had been involved. Ifa third person had been involved, there would be a suspicion of
criminality. Once that had been excluded, Mr Gaines would take over and would obtain
witness statements. In this, he would be left to his own devices although, if the Coroner
wanted further statements when the file had been submitted to him, these would be
obtained. Mr Gaines would not know what the medical evidence was and, in a drugrelated
case, might not have any knowledge of the effect of the drugs the deceased was
suspected oftaking.
9.42 As a rule, Mr Pollard would himselfconduct any investigation ofthe medical aspect ofa
death. Ifevidence were needed from a doctor, whether a hospital clinician or a general
practitioner, Mr Pollard would obtain it. Usually, ifthe death had occurred in hospital, he
would write to the hospital administrator, asking for a report on the circumstances of the
death from the appropriate consultant. In making such a request, he uses a proforma
letter; he does not ask specific questions or refer to specific issues. Thus, the statement,
when provided, would not be targeted at the issues to be decided at the inquest.
204
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
9.43 The overall impression that I gained was that investigations were unfocussed and lacked
co-ordination by a person who understood the issues and had access to all the available
information.
Deaths Possibly Caused or Contributed to by Medical Error or Neglect
9.44 As I mentioned in Chapter Eight, Mr Michael Burgess, HM Coroner for Surrey, said that the
number of deaths reported to his office requiring some form of investigation into a medical
mishap or nursing care was increasing. As with cases ofother kinds, the practice relating
to the investigation ofthis type ofcase varies from district to district.
Who Should Investigate Such Cases for the Coroner?
9.45 In some districts, possibly most, investigations involving a ‘medical element’ are carried
out by the police, even though there is no suggestion that the medical error or neglect
might amount to a criminal offence. There was general agreement among the witnesses
at the Inquiry and the participants at the Inquiry’s seminars that the police were not well
placed to conduct such investigations. They did not have, and could not be expected to
have, the necessary medical knowledge or expertise. Also, it seems to me that the
involvement ofthe police in such a case would tend to raise to an unnecessary level the
anxiety felt by any professional whose conduct or competence comes under scrutiny. In
my view, such investigations should not be undertaken by the police unless there is a
suspicion ofcriminality. Ifthe investigation discovered facts suggesting that there had
been neglect or error serious enough to warrant the consideration ofcriminal
proceedings, the coroner could always refer the case to the police at that stage.
9.46 Ifsuch investigations are not to be conducted by the police, who should be responsible
for them? In Greater Manchester South District, Mr Pollard does not usually involve the
police in the investigation ofallegations ofmedical error or neglect. As I have already said,
he undertakes the investigation himself. The unsatisfactory nature of that process is
illustrated by the following two cases, which were noticed by the Inquiry team on
examining some ofMr Pollard’s inquest files. In commenting upon the conduct ofthese
two investigations, I do not wish it to be thought that I am being critical ofMr Pollard
individually. I describe these investigations and their shortcomings to illustrate that the
task ofenquiring into a death which might have resulted from a medical error or neglect
is very difficult to perform satisfactorily within the current legal framework and requires
expertise which neither a police officer nor a legally qualified coroner with very limited
medical knowledge is likely to have. They are further examples ofthe variability ofpractice
and procedure noted by the Coroners Review and observed first-hand by the authors of
Home Office Research Study 241, to which I have already referred in Chapter Seven.
The Case of Mr X
9.47 Mr X died at the age of80. Two months before his death, he had undergone a right
below-knee amputation; he suffered from severe peripheral vascular disease and had a
history of problems with his right foot. Nine days after the operation, he was discharged
to the nursing home where he had been living previously. While at the nursing home, he
205
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
developed an infection of the stump. He was re-admitted to hospital two weeks before his
death. Following the death, a doctor from the clinical team responsible for Mr X’s hospital
care contacted the coroner’s office and indicated that he was prepared to certify the
cause ofdeath, ifthe coroner agreed. However, Mr Pollard decided to order an autopsy.
Mr X’s family was informed of the decision and expressed concern about the standard of
care he had received at the nursing home. The autopsy result was faxed to the coroner’s
office four days after the death; the cause of death was said to be bilateral lobar
pneumonia due to an infected right amputation stump. Mr Pollard opened and adjourned
an inquest.
9.48 The autopsy report that followed recorded, as part of the history, that the deceased had
been admitted to hospital two weeks before his death with general deterioration and
dehydration. Mr X was said to have sacral pressure sores and an unhealthy gaping wound
at the amputation site. The clinical impression was that he had a urinary tract infection. It
was also recorded that Mr X had a past history ofdiabetes mellitus, dementia and
peripheral vascular disease resulting in bilateral below-knee amputations.
9.49 The autopsy report did not mention whether or not the pathologist had found any sacral
pressure sores. The principal finding was ofbilateral lobar pneumonia. The flap over the
right amputation stump was said to show an open wound. There was said to be no
evidence ofurinary tract infection at the time ofdeath. The cause ofdeath was given as
stated above. The pathologist cited congestive cardiac failure, ischaemic heart disease
and bilateral amputations for peripheral vascular disease as conditions that had
contributed to the death, though not related to the disease or condition causing it.
9.50 Six days after the death, Mr Pollard wrote to the hospital asking for a report on their care
ofMr X. The letter was in standard form and did not ask any specific questions. Neither
Mr Pollard’s CLOs nor his coroner’s officers had any role in the enquiries that took place;
nor did any police officer.
9.51 A month later, a member ofthe family wrote to the Coroner, enclosing a lengthy statement
in which she set out in detail the concerns felt by the family about Mr X’s medical treatment
and care. These concerns can be summarised as follows:
(a) The family suggested that, in several respects, Mr X had not received proper care in
the nursing home. It was suggested that, before the amputation, the staff had failed
to keep his troublesome right foot dry, despite the fact that the hospital consultant
had given instructions to that effect. They had failed to ensure that Mr X was taking
his medication.
(b) Mr X had been discharged from hospital only nine days after his amputation. He had
deteriorated quickly after discharge. The family was concerned that he had been
discharged too soon.
(c) Staff in the nursing home had removed Mr X’s catheter immediately on his return
there, although the family had understood that it was to remain in situ for four weeks
after the operation. They had also failed to ensure that Mr X was receiving adequate
nourishment, particularly in the light ofthe fact that he had an impaired swallow
reflex.
206
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
(d) The family had been told by the nursing home staff, three days before his
re-admission to hospital, that a ‘wound specialist’ had seen Mr X and had not been
unduly worried by his condition. Nonetheless, only three days later, Mr X had
developed pressure sores that were so badly infected as to warrant re-admission.
9.52 It is clear that, ifthese concerns were found to be true, they were capable ofamounting
to gross neglect, certainly so far as the nursing home was concerned. Mr Pollard
responded to the family’s expression of concern by saying that, at the inquest, he would
permit such questioning as was needed to establish how, when and where the death had
occurred. In oral evidence to the Inquiry, he explained that his perception was that the
death could reasonably be regarded as being due to natural causes ifthe treatment was
adequate. He did not undertake to investigate the family’s concerns, but indicated only
that the family could ask questions within the limits he had defined. It must have been
extremely difficult for the family to understand the parameters Mr Pollard set on the
inquest, how they would operate at the inquest, and the legal basis for setting those
parameters.
9.53 Mr Pollard had not at that time received any evidence from the hospital. In due course, he
received a report from Dr P of the Cardiology Department of the hospital, who said that
he was the consultant responsible for Mr X’s care during his last admission. This report
described Mr X’s poor condition on re-admission to hospital and explained the treatment
provided – rehydration, intravenous antibiotics, debridement ofthe infected tissue ofthe
stump and pain relief. Despite such treatment, Mr X’s condition had deteriorated and he
had died two weeks later. This report did not, and could not, have been expected to,
address any ofthe concerns raised by the family; those concerns had not been
communicated by Mr Pollard to the hospital. Yet, having by now received the family’s
detailed account oftheir concerns, Mr Pollard did not contact the hospital again, to ask
questions specifically relating to the possible lack ofcare by the nursing home staffor to
Mr X’s post-operative discharge. Nor did Mr Pollard direct that any evidence should be
obtained from the nursing home; in particular, he did not arrange for any nursing notes
kept by the nursing home to be produced at the inquest. The management ofthe nursing
home was not even notified that an inquest was to take place.
9.54 As a result, no evidence was obtained which would have allowed proper exploration of
the issues raised by the family or the general adequacy of Mr X’s medical treatment and
nursing care.
9.55 At the adjourned inquest, which was not conducted by Mr Pollard, the only witness to give
oral evidence was the pathologist. A verdict ofnatural causes was entered. That might
have been correct; I cannot say. The papers contain no record ofthe evidence given
orally, nor any note ofthe Coroner’s reasons.
9.56 However, it is apparent that the family was not satisfied that there had been an adequate
investigation of the death. After the inquest, the family wrote, asking for the notes of
evidence ofthe inquest. Mr Pollard replied, enclosing copies ofthe ‘depositions’ which
apparently comprised five sheets ofpaper. It appears that these were the autopsy report
and the report ofDr P. The family then wrote again, asking why a verdict ofnatural causes
had been entered. The Coroner who had conducted the inquest replied that, at the
207
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
inquest, the pathologist had been questioned very closely as to the cause ofdeath. The
pathologist had said that the cause was a natural cause, as she had said in the autopsy
report. The Coroner suggested that ifthe writer wanted any further explanation, she should
consult her general practitioner, taking with her a copy ofthe autopsy report. The family
must have been deeply disappointed that their concerns had not been subjected to closer
scrutiny. They had been given no answers by the inquest process.
9.57 In evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Pollard explained that he had not sought further evidence
from the hospital or any evidence from the nursing home because the pathologist had
given him ‘a cause ofdeath’ and would be able to answer questions related to the issues
ofhow, when and where Mr X had died. He considered that the pathologist would have
been able, at the hearing, to answer any questions raised by the family. He said that in
every inquest that he holds it is possible to consider that further evidence should be
obtained; however, according to Mr Pollard, a line has to be drawn somewhere and there
is too great a delay at present in the hearing ofinquests in his district. I find that answer
disturbing for several reasons.
9.58 First, it suggests undue reliance on the fact that the pathologist has found a cause of
death, essentially the medical cause ofdeath, without seeking to enquire, as the family
understandably wished, about any contributory causes – in this case the treatment, or lack
ofit, provided by the nursing home. The role ofa coroner in such circumstances should
be to enquire, proactively. This is particularly so ifconcerns ofa sensible nature are raised
about the circumstances ofthe death. Ofcourse, I accept that a coroner cannot be
expected to investigate fully every minor expression of concern about possible
contributory factors that he receives from a bereaved family, some of which might have
played no part in causing the death. However, the concerns in the case ofMr X were
expressed clearly and in detail. They appeared to be sensible and Mr Pollard did not
suggest that they were not. Ifthere had been neglect, as the family suggested, it might
have been sufficiently serious to have contributed to the cause of death. Yet, Mr Pollard
considered that he had fulfilled his investigative function by obtaining a narrative history
from the hospital and saying that appropriate questions could be asked of the pathologist
at the inquest. It appears that the family relied upon the Coroner to ask questions. That was
not an unreasonable expectation, as they had explained their concerns in detail in
advance. In my view, there had not been an adequate investigation ofthe circumstances
ofthe death and, as a result, the inquest could not fulfil its proper purpose.
9.59 Second, it is apparent that it was expected that the pathologist would be able to deal with
all the issues that the family wished to raise. However, the pathologist could not know
important elements in the history, such as what steps the nursing home staff had taken to
keep the foot dry and when the foot had begun to show signs of infection. Nor could she
know what steps the nursing home had taken to ensure that Mr X took his medication and
received adequate nourishment and fluids. Nor could she know what had happened when
the ‘wound specialist’ had seen Mr X. She would not know when the pressure sores
developed or how they were treated. These matters were questions offact, which could
be answered only by the nursing staff involved and by production of the nursing records.
It appears that the pathologist would have been able to say that the premature removal of
the catheter had not contributed to the cause ofdeath; there was no evidence ofurinary
208
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
tract infection at autopsy. However, she would not have been able to say whether any
possible failure of the nursing home staff (in the respects I have mentioned above) could
have had any effect on the course of Mr X’s decline. To do so would have been outside
her area ofexpertise. It appears that it is common practice for coroners to rely on the
evidence ofa pathologist on matters lying far outside his/her expertise. Other pathologists
told the Inquiry that they are often asked, at inquests, to deal with issues outside their
expertise. They find themselves doing their best, out ofa desire to assist the family and
the coroner by providing answers and allowing the proceedings to be brought to a
conclusion. This practice is to be deprecated. No expert should ever be asked to answer
questions outside his/her field ofexpertise and indeed should not agree to do so, and yet
the practice adopted seems not to be uncommon.
9.60 Third, Mr Pollard said that he did not think it appropriate to ask the pathologist in advance
about the issues likely to be raised by the family at the hearing; he thought there was a
danger that the family might suggest that he had ‘primed’ the witness. I think that such a
suggestion could be avoided ifthe communication between the coroner and pathologist
is set out in correspondence that the family can be shown. Otherwise, if the risk of such a
suggestion is to be avoided and no communication is to take place between coroner and
pathologist, not only may the pathologist be ill equipped to provide an opinion, by virtue
ofhis/her lack ofexpertise in the area, but s/he will also be deprived ofan opportunity to
consider the issues in advance. The effect of Mr Pollard’s practice is that he would begin
the inquest hearing with no idea whether or not the pathologist would be able to deal with
the issues raised. Mr Pollard said that he would be quite prepared to adjourn the hearing
ifit emerged that the pathologist could not deal with the issues. That, in my view, is not a
proper approach to a hearing which the bereaved family has attended with anxieties and
raised expectations. In any event, in Mr X’s case, there should have been no question of
the pathologist dealing with the issues, because ofher lack ofknowledge ofthe factual
background.
9.61 Mr Pollard said that he did not have the time or the staff to deal with cases such as this in
an appropriate way. That may well be the case but, ifso, it is not a satisfactory state of
affairs. However, I think that the real problem is not too large a caseload, but the lack of
appropriate expertise. In my view, a legally qualified coroner, without a medically qualified
colleague, might well find it difficult and time-consuming to analyse what is required for
the proper investigation ofsuch a case as this. A medically qualified coroner would be in
a better position to do so. Moreover, it is obvious that, ifproper enquiries were to be made
at the nursing home, they would have to be undertaken by a coroner’s officer with some
medical or nursing background or knowledge and an understanding ofthe issues likely
to be addressed at any future inquest.
The Case of Mrs Y
9.62 The second inquest case examined by the Inquiry concerned Mrs Y. She had attended an
accident and emergency department late one evening, complaining ofsevere abdominal
pain. She was admitted and underwent an operation at about midnight. It appeared to her
family that she was making a reasonable recovery from her operation, but she died
suddenly two days later. The death was reported to the Coroner, who ordered an autopsy.
209
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
9.63 The autopsy report described a perforated area 2cm in diameter in the lower third of the
oesophagus. There was leakage ofcontents from the oesophagus into the right pleural
space, where there was brown fluid and associated inflammation. The oesophagus
appeared somewhat narrowed in the perforated area. The stomach was found to be
unremarkable. In the duodenum, there was an area ofoversewing ofthe anterior wall,
which must have represented the site ofthe operation. The operative site appeared
healthy. There was an ulcer 2cm in diameter on the wall ofthe duodenum but no evidence
ofleakage ofthe contents ofthe duodenum into the peritoneal cavity. All other findings
were unremarkable.
9.64 The pathologist’s conclusion was that the cause ofdeath was a perforated oesophagus
following surgery for a perforated duodenal ulcer. This conclusion was, to some extent,
ambiguous. It rather sounded as though the pathologist was suggesting a causal
connection between the perforated oesophagus, which was the immediate cause of
death, and the previous surgery to repair the duodenal ulcer. However, from reading the
body ofthe report, it appears that no such causal connection was believed to have
existed, only a connection in time. The body ofthe report suggested that the perforation
that had caused the death was in the oesophagus (from which leakage had been
observed), and not in the duodenum, where there were signs ofa successful operative
repair. A further ulcer in the duodenum had not apparently perforated.
9.65 On receipt ofthe autopsy report, Mr Pollard wrote to the hospital, using his standard letter,
asking for a report on the treatment of Mrs Y. In due course, this was supplied. The report
was written by the consultant surgeon nominally in charge ofthe patient’s case. She had
discussed the case with the junior doctors involved but had no personal knowledge ofit.
She described the findings on admission and the steps taken to diagnose the perforation
ofthe duodenal ulcer. The report named the surgeon who had carried out the repair
operation. After repair, the peritoneal cavity was washed out and a drain inserted. The
post-operative care was described. Progress was said to be satisfactory for two days until
Mrs Y died suddenly at 5.30am. Attempts at resuscitation failed. The consultant drew
attention to the autopsy findings and the conclusion that the cause ofdeath was a
perforation of the oesophagus. She described Mrs Y’s past medical history of
oesophagitis and expressed her doubt that Mrs Y always took the medication prescribed
for that condition. The writer then expressed the opinion that the perforation of the
oesophagus had occurred shortly before the death. She suggested that the nursing chart
provided a clue as to the time at which the perforation had occurred. There had been a
sudden rise in the pulse rate to 130 beats per minute at about 10pm on the evening before
death. However, this had fallen back to 110 beats per minute by 2am the next morning.
The writer observed that no change had been observed in Mrs Y’s general condition
during this period and she had not complained ofchest pain, which was said to be a
‘cardinal symptom’ ofan oesophageal perforation.
9.66 Apart from a brief statement taken from a member of Mrs Y’s family, the only evidence
obtained in advance ofthe inquest was the autopsy report and the consultant’s letter. The
family had not expressed any concern about Mrs Y’s treatment at hospital. However, it
would be normal for them to wish to know whether she had died as the result of error made
in the treatment given in hospital or whether the death had been ‘natural’, and there is also
210
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
a wider public interest in knowing that information. Only the pathologist and a member of
the family were asked to attend the inquest. Neither the consultant who had written the
report, nor the surgeon who had repaired the duodenal ulcer, was asked to attend.
9.67 There is no record ofthe conduct ofthe inquest. Mr Pollard returned a verdict of
misadventure. In evidence to the Inquiry, he explained that that verdict implies that the
death was due to an unexpected result ofa deliberate action; in other words, it was not due
to natural causes. Mr Pollard agreed that, on the basis ofthe written materials, he could not
explain how it was that he had come to the conclusion (as he apparently had) that Mrs Y’s
death had been due to something that had gone wrong during the operation on the
duodenum. He thought it was probably connected with the fact that the site of the
operative repair to the duodenum was not far from the site of the fatal perforation of the
oesophagus. He said that oral evidence had been received from the pathologist that had
drawn him to his conclusion. He had made no written record ofthat evidence and could
not now remember what it was. There was no record ofhis reasons for reaching a verdict
ofmisadventure. I was concerned and puzzled that the pathologist could have expressed
the view that the oesophageal perforation (which had clearly caused the death) had
somehow been caused at the time ofthe operation. Ifthere were any signs observed at
autopsy which had enabled him to reach that conclusion, one might have expected to see
them recorded in the autopsy report.
9.68 Of further concern is the fact that the Coroner reached a conclusion which implied some
degree ofresponsibility upon the surgeon who had performed the repair ofthe duodenum
without giving that surgeon any notice that his conduct might be called into question or
any opportunity to give evidence. The hospital authority had been given notice ofthe
inquest, but not ofthe possibility ofany criticism. The surgeon who performed the
operation would have been an important witness. He had not even been asked to provide
a statement. Mr Pollard’s verdict might or might not have been correct. Whichever it was,
I am left with a feeling of unease about the adequacy of the investigation and the accuracy
and fairness of the inquest verdict.
Conclusions about Investigations
9.69 There is, in my view, an urgent need for a more focussed, professional and consistent
approach to coroners’ investigations; this is needed from the time that the death is
reported, right up to the verdict. There needs to be clarity as to the purpose and scope
ofthe enquiries that are made. Coroners themselves, who are to direct the conduct ofan
investigation, require training. Legal experience, particularly as a solicitor, should provide
a sound basis for the conduct of an investigation into non-medical matters, but it is
apparent, from the cases that I have described, that medical knowledge and experience
is vital for the proper conduct of many investigations, as well as for the proper evaluation
ofevidence and the taking ofdecisions. Coroner’s officers, who are, at present, almost
wholly untrained, will require training, management and direction ifthey are to assume an
effective investigative role.
9.70 The quality of information which comes into the coroner’s office at the time of a death must
be greatly improved. Instead ofan oral account from the reporting doctor, there should
211
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
be a short written account ofthe deceased’s medical history and a written account ofthe
circumstances of the death, each to be provided on a prescribed form. Coroner’s officers
should always seek to obtain information from relatives or those with knowledge of the
deceased in order to verify or expand upon the information provided by the health
professionals who have completed the forms.
9.71 The coroner should have the power to seize or compel the production ofdocuments,
records and other material relevant to the investigation ofa death. I agree with the
recommendation ofthe Brodrick Committee which, as long ago as 1971, suggested that
the coroner should have power to take possession ofa body, to enter and inspect
premises where a body has been found or has been moved from or where the deceased
was prior to death, to inspect, receive and copy information from documents relating to
the deceased and to seize any property material to the investigation.
9.72 The coroner should have the discretion to certify the cause of a death following
investigation, without the need in every case to order an autopsy or hold an inquest.
Instead ofproceeding automatically to order an autopsy, coroners should make use ofa
variety ofinvestigative methods; for example examining medical records, ordering an
external (i.e. non-invasive) examination ofthe body and obtaining witness statements. If
the coroner considers that an autopsy is necessary, the family should be notified in
advance and the reasons for the decision should be explained to them. They should be
able to make representations and should have the right to appeal the decision. I will
discuss later where such an appeal should lie.
9.73 Coroners should be required to provide improved information for pathologists instructed
to perform an autopsy. No pathologist should ever be expected to manage without the
medical records ofthe deceased. Nor should a pathologist be denied the opportunity to
conduct whatever ancillary tests s/he thinks appropriate for the proper investigation of the
cause ofdeath provided that there is proper medical justification for the carrying out of
those tests. I endorse the recommendations ofthe RCPath in their drive to improve the
conduct ofautopsies.
9.74 Death investigations in which any issue ofmedical error or neglect arises require
particular expertise. I shall suggest that, ifthere is any degree ofcomplexity, such
investigations should be conducted by a specialist team ofinvestigators.
Inquests
9.75 In the light ofthe very limited number ofinquests that were conducted into the deaths of
Shipman’s patients, it might be wondered why there is any need or justification for me to
consider the topic ofinquests. I do so because, in the course ofthe Inquiry, I became
aware ofthe widespread concern felt about the number ofinquests currently held and the
way in which many inquests were conducted. Such concerns were apparent from the
reports oflegal cases I had to consider, as well as from responses to the Coroners Review
Consultation Paper. They were confirmed by Home Office Research Study 241,
‘Experiencing Inquests’, to which I have already referred. As I intend to make
recommendations about the jurisdiction ofthe coroner and the way in which the coronial
212
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
service should be organised, it seems sensible to include such views as I have been able
to form about inquests. I shall not embark on a detailed consideration of the way inquests
are conducted but will confine myselfto consideration ofthe purposes ofthe coroner’s
investigation and the circumstances in which a public inquest should be held.
9.76 On other issues, I shall say little or nothing. I have read the Report ofthe Coroners Review,
which has examined the issues relating to inquests in detail. I concur with the views
expressed in Chapter 8 ofthe Review’s Report on inquest outcomes (paragraphs 25(a),
(b), (c) and (d)), evidential standards (paragraphs 30 and 31), implications ofliability
(paragraphs 32 to 40) and the scope ofthe inquest (paragraphs 53 to 59). In Chapter 9
ofthe Review’s Report, which deals with the handling ofinquests, I agree with the views
expressed as to jurisdiction and support (paragraphs 1 to 13), the need for a Rules
Committee (paragraphs 14 to 19), the pre-inquest hearing (paragraphs 20 and 21),
disclosure (paragraphs 22 to 28), addresses as to the facts (paragraphs 29 to 31) and
publicity (paragraphs 55 to 58). I say nothing about the questions of
self-incrimination and juries, which I regard as particularly difficult subjects requiring
detailed consideration.
The Purpose of Coronial Inquests
9.77 The purpose ofan inquest in England and Wales is not currently defined by statute.
Instead, section 8 ofthe Coroners Act 1988, to which I have already referred at paragraph
7.17, states the circumstances in which a coroner is under a duty to hold an inquest. Rule
36 ofthe Coroners Rules 1984 sets out the matters to be ascertained at the inquest and
provides:
‘(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed solely
to ascertaining the following matters, namely –
(a) who the deceased was;
(b) how, when and where the deceased came by his death;
(c) the particulars for the time being required by the Registration
Act to be registered concerning the death
(2) Neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any opinion on any
other matters.’
9.78 It is possible to infer from section 8 and from rule 36 that the function of an inquest is to
discover, in the case ofa violent or unnatural death, a sudden death ofwhich the cause
is unknown or a death in prison, who the deceased was and how, when and where s/he
came by his/her death. The inquest will also seek to establish the particulars required for
the registration ofthe death. However, these provisions throw little light on why it is thought
desirable to discover these facts in the deaths caught by section 8.
9.79 Historically, the purpose ofthe coroner’s inquest was to determine whether there was
criminal involvement in the death. That was plainly a ‘public interest’ purpose. Nowadays,
such investigation is the province ofthe police. Today, the purpose ofthe public
investigation ofthe deaths caught by section 8 is unclear. The coroners who gave
evidence stressed the need for the purposes of the coronial inquest to be clearly stated
213
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
in future. I have the impression that they feel that the fact that the inquest has no defined
purpose which the public can understand leads to difficulty and unrealistic expectations.
9.80 According to the author ofthe latest edition ofJervis on Coroners1, the functions of an
inquest are ‘really to determine certain facts about the deceased, the cause of death,
and the circumstances surrounding both death and that cause’. In R v South London
Coroner, ex parte Thompson2, Lord Lane CJ observed that ‘the function of an inquest
is to seek out and record as many of the facts concerning the death as public interest
requires’. In R v HM Coroner for North Humberside and Scunthorpe, ex parte Jamieson3
the Court ofAppeal said that the main question to which evidence and inquiry are most
often and most closely directed was how the deceased ‘came by his death’. That
question was to be contrasted with the issue of ‘how the deceased died’, which might
raise general and far-reaching issues. It has repeatedly been said that it is not the function
ofa coroner or his/her jury to determine, or appear to determine, any question ofcriminal
or civil liability or to apportion guilt or attribute blame. The coroner is required to find out
what happened, but not to attribute blame, even though the actions ofsomeone involved
might appear to warrant it. In short, the coroner has a difficult task with uncertain
parameters.
9.81 These dicta, helpful though they are, only define the function of the inquest, not its
purpose. For whose benefit is the inquest to be conducted? Lord Lane suggested that it
is the public interest that is to be served. In 1971, the Brodrick Committee identified five
grounds ofpublic interest which they believed a coroner’s inquiry should serve, namely:
‘(i) to determine the medical cause of death;
(ii) to allay rumours or suspicion;
(iii) to draw attention to the existence of circumstances which, if
unremedied, might lead to further deaths;
(iv) to advance medical knowledge;
(v) to preserve the legal interest of the deceased person’s family, heirs,
or other interested parties’.
9.82 Parliament requires an inquest to be held in the cases covered by the provisions ofsection
8 ofthe 1988 Act, presumably because that section identifies deaths, such as violent or
unnatural deaths, that might reasonably be expected to give rise to public concern ifthe
circumstances remained unclear. I have already observed that it is not easy for coroners
to decide whether a death falls within the provisions of section 8 and the results of their
decisions often do not bear logical examination. Moreover, the general perception of
those contributing to the Inquiry is that many deaths properly caught by section 8 do not
give rise to any question ofpublic interest or concern. Also, section 8 fails to catch some
deaths that do give rise to public concern.
9.83 This issue was considered by Simon Brown LJ in the case ofR v Inner London North
Coroner, ex parte Touche4. In that case, the deceased had died as the result ofa cerebral
1 Matthews, P (2002) ‘Jervis on Coroners’, Twelfth edition. London: Thomson Sweet & Maxwell.
2 [1982] 126 SJ 625.
3 [1995] QB 1.
4 [2001] QB 1206.
214
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
haemorrhage after developing high blood pressure following a caesarean section. This
was a natural cause ofdeath and the Coroner initially declined jurisdiction. On judicial
review, the Coroner was ordered to hold an inquest. His appeal failed. In dismissing the
appeal, Simon Brown LJ suggested that there was a powerful case for holding an inquest
not only into ‘unnatural’ deaths but also ‘whenever a wholly unexpected death, albeit
from natural causes, results from some culpable human failure’. He observed that
such deaths caused understandable public concern which could be allayed by a
coroner’s investigation. The implied suggestion was that section 8 is not a satisfactory
means ofselecting deaths for public inquest. Simon Brown LJ also drew attention to the
rather tortuous means which coroners sometimes have to adopt in order to bring a death
within section 8. For example, some coroners who wished to conduct an inquest into
deaths from legionnaire’s disease (on the face of it a rare but natural cause of death) had
been driven to reason that the mechanical spraying ofinfected water into the atmosphere
(apparently a reference to the operation of an inadequately maintained air-conditioning
system) made a death resulting from that spraying ‘unnatural’.
9.84 In short, section 8 is not a satisfactory means of selecting those deaths where the public
interest requires public investigation. In my view, in the modern era, the purposes ofthe
public inquest should be:
- to conduct a public investigation into deaths which have or might have resulted from
an unlawful act or unlawful acts
- to inform interested bodies and the public at large about deaths which give rise to
issues relating to public safety, public health and the prevention of avoidable death
and injury
- to provide public scrutiny ofthose deaths that occur in circumstances in which there
exists the possibility ofan abuse ofpower.
Do We Have Too Many Public Inquests?
9.85 In this country all inquests are conducted in public. Plainly that is appropriate ifthe inquest
is to serve a public interest. Ifthe public has no interest in a death, should there be a public
inquest, merely because the death might be due to an unnatural cause such as suicide
or an industrial disease? It might be more appropriate for the investigation of such deaths
to take place in private.
9.86 The effect ofsection 8 ofthe Coroners Act 1988 is that a very large number ofpublic
inquests are held in England and Wales each year. In 2001 (the most recent year for which
figures are available), inquests were held into nearly 25,800 deaths, which represents
almost 13% ofall deaths reported to coroners and nearly 5% ofall registered deaths.
Enquiries made by the Inquiry team suggest that inquests are held into a far greater
proportion ofdeaths in England and Wales than in many other countries, where deaths are
investigated (often more thoroughly than in England and Wales) and a written report is
prepared.
9.87 Some jurisdictions have no provision at all for the conduct of an inquest. For example, in
Maryland, USA, deaths are investigated by medical examiners and an expression of
215
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
opinion about the cause ofthe death is added to the autopsy report. This opinion will also
contain information about the circumstances of the death. The report is a public
document. Any person with a sufficient interest in the report can seek a review of the
report, first by the ChiefMedical Examiner, then, ifleave is granted, by an administrative
judge, from whom there is a final right of appeal to a circuit court judge. Information from
the death investigation is harnessed for the purposes of improving public health and
safety and is passed to a number of relevant bodies responsible for injury prevention and
community health. Thus, the interests ofthe family in finding out what happened and the
interests ofthe community are served without holding an inquest.
9.88 In Finland, there is no inquest or comparable proceeding. Deaths reported to the medical
examiner are investigated by pathologists and often by the police, even where there is no
suspicion ofcriminal involvement. A report into the death is produced and seen by
relatives but is not a public document. Information from the investigation is provided to the
authorities with responsibility for public health and safety.
9.89 In the state ofVictoria, Australia, and the province ofOntario, Canada, inquests are held,
but in far fewer cases than in England and Wales. In Victoria, 0.8% of total deaths are
followed by a public inquest. Apart from a few circumstances in which an inquest is
mandatory (for example for cases of homicide, deaths in custody or care, or cases where
the body is unidentified), the conduct ofan inquest is a matter for the coroner’s discretion.
This is usually exercised where there is a matter ofpublic interest at stake. Deaths
reported to the coroner, in which no inquest is held, are investigated and a report is
prepared which becomes a public document.
9.90 In Ontario, there is a similar provision for mandatory inquests; otherwise, inquests are held
in the pursuance ofthe public interest. The number held is small (only 72 inquests were
held in 2002 out ofabout 20,000 deaths reported to the coroner) but the issues are
examined in depth and the purpose ofsuch inquests is the production of
recommendations directed to the avoidance ofdeath or injury in similar circumstances.
Indeed, the motto ofthe Ontario ChiefCoroner’s Office is ‘We Speak for the Dead to
Protect the Living’. It is quite common for a single inquest to be held into several deaths,
all ofwhich have arisen in similar circumstances or share a common cause. In deaths
which are reported to the coroner where no inquest is held, a report on the death is
prepared and provided for a defined class of family and associates of the deceased. The
report is not a public document.
9.91 In Scotland, some classes ofdeath are reported to the procurator fiscal, who will cause
the police to investigate the circumstances and will direct such medical investigations as
s/he thinks necessary to determine the cause ofdeath. At the end ofthe investigation, the
procurator fiscal is obliged to report certain categories ofcase to the Crown Office, and to
make recommendations. The Lord Advocate, assisted by Crown counsel, will then decide
whether further action is necessary, either by way of prosecution or by the conduct of a
fatal accident inquiry.
9.92 Fatal accident inquiries are conducted by sheriffs, the judicial equivalent of the circuit
judge in England and Wales. A fatal accident inquiry is mandatory in deaths due to an
accident in the course ofemployment and for deaths in custody. Otherwise, the decision
216
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
to hold a fatal accident inquiry is a matter of discretion for the Lord Advocate. Before the
decision is made and the procurator fiscal makes his/her recommendations about the
future conduct of the case, the family of the deceased will be consulted. The usual criteria
are related to public interest and concern. A fatal accident inquiry is designed to find the
facts relating to the death and not to allocate blame. Recommendations for the future
avoidance ofa similar occurrence, or relating to any aspect ofpublic health or safety, are
sent by the sheriff to the procurator fiscal who promulgates them to the appropriate body.
Very few fatal accident inquiries are held; in the year 2001/2, only 64 were held out of a
total of13,625 deaths reported to the procurator fiscal. That figure represents less than
0.5% ofthe deaths reported to the procurator fiscal.
9.93 It is clear that other jurisdictions manage without any or without a large number ofpublic
inquests. I think that the inquest is so well entrenched in our legal system that its complete
abolition would not be acceptable. The real question is whether the criteria for holding a
public inquest should be changed. I think there are positive reasons to have inquests,
provided that they are thorough and are well conducted. There are public health and
public safety advantages. Also, where issues of public concern arise, an inquest can
expose failings or engender confidence. However, if no such issues arise, the public
inquest may be an unnecessary invasion ofprivacy.
Views Expressed at the Inquiry
9.94 At the Inquiry, there was a large measure ofagreement with the suggestion advanced in
the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper that too many inquests are held in England and Wales. Of
the four coroners who gave evidence, only Mr Christopher Dorries, HM Coroner for South
Yorkshire (West) was ofthe view that the present arrangements were satisfactory and that
the criteria for the holding of inquests in public were appropriate. He said that an inquest
was ‘a voyage of discovery’ and often found out previously unsuspected facts and
circumstances. He did not believe that the facts could be adequately discovered by a
thorough investigation without an oral hearing. Moreover, he said that the relatives ofthe
deceased welcomed an oral hearing as it gave them the opportunity to question the
pathologist in a formal setting where the pathologist was obliged to provide answers to
their questions.
9.95 When he gave evidence, Mr Burgess expressed the view that the number ofinquests
conducted was appropriate, although he thought that some should take place in private.
By the time ofthe seminars, he had modified his view and agreed that too many hearings
took place. He thought that the categories ofdeaths to be investigated should remain the
same, but that many deaths could be properly investigated without a hearing. The result
ofthe investigation could instead be set out in a written report.
9.96 Mr Pollard stressed the need for families to receive a written decision, so that they could
know what had happened and why, but he thought there was no need for all inquests to
be conducted in public. He agreed with Mr Dorries that families welcome the opportunity
to question the pathologist, but he also agreed that, provided that opportunity were given,
this need not take place in the formal setting of the court room.
217
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
9.97 Dr Nigel Chapman, HM Coroner for Nottinghamshire, would be content to see the number
of inquests reduced and felt that the criterion for holding an inquest should be whether the
death raised issues ofpublic interest. He said that far too many inquests are held in public
and that this is often distressing, and even harmful, to the relatives. He described an
occasion when he had encouraged a widow to give limited (and misleading) evidence
about the background reasons for her husband’s suicide in order to avoid distressing
facts going into the public domain.
9.98 Mrs Aline Warner, who represented the Coroner’s Officers Association at the Inquiry’s
seminars, expressed the view that bereaved families needed to know what had happened
and welcomed the idea that some investigations should not take place in public. She
suggested that the result ofany investigation should be made public, because this would
allay any rumour or gossip about the death.
9.99 Dr Peter Acland, a forensic pathologist who represented the RCPath at one of the
seminars, said that, in his view, there were too many inquests; he doubted whether they
were ofmuch benefit to relatives. He thought that a less formal way ofconveying the
results ofan investigation to relatives would be preferable. Dr Anne Thorpe, a consultant
histopathologist representing the British Medical Association, agreed with that view.
9.100 Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit
at the University ofLeicester, speaking at the seminars, also agreed that there was no
need for so many public inquests but stressed the need for the community to learn from
the investigation ofdeaths. He considered that, in England and Wales, this feature ofthe
coroner’s inquest or investigation was neglected. There was general agreement that the
knowledge gained from an inquest or investigation should be harnessed for the general
good.
Conclusions about Inquests
9.101 In summary, the general view at the seminars was that there must be an investigation of
all deaths to an appropriate depth. The results ofthe investigation must be fully explained
to the relatives ofthe deceased. However, provided that any lessons learned from the
investigation can be harnessed for the public good, there is, in many cases, no need for,
and little benefit to be derived from, a public hearing. I agree with that general view.
9.102 In my view, coronial investigation is important for three reasons. It ensures that relatives
ofthe deceased, and those with a personal interest in the death ofthe deceased,
understand how and why the death has occurred. That will entail an understanding of
the medical cause ofdeath and, ifnecessary, clarification ofthe factual circumstances
in which it occurred. Such understanding is a natural human need. It assists in coming
to terms with the death and may avoid suspicion and resentment about the
circumstances in the future. Second, an investigation is needed in the public interest
so as to ensure that neglect or misconduct resulting in a death does not go
undiscovered. Only by learning how and why a death has occurred is it possible to
learn from errors and avoid the recurrence of an avoidable death. Third, the public also
has a legitimate interest in the accurate diagnosis ofthe cause ofdeath. This is ofbenefit
218
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
to the advancement ofmedical science and the proper use ofthe resources ofthe state
in the prevention and treatment ofillness.
9.103 All those important interests could, in most cases, be served by an investigation ofthe
death (to whatever depth is appropriate in the circumstances), followed by the
communication ofthe results to those with a private interest or with a duty to safeguard
some aspect ofthe public interest. In many such cases, nothing is gained by the public
airing ofthe evidence. Indeed, in many cases, such exposure amounts to an
unwarranted invasion ofprivacy and only causes increased distress to the bereaved.
9.104 In my opinion, the public inquest should be limited to those deaths about which there
is a real public ‘need to know’, as opposed to the theoretical public interest that section
8 of the 1988 Act is designed to identify. I would favour the abolition of the section 8
criteria for the holding of an inquest and would confine inquests to deaths where the
particular circumstances are such that the public interest requires a public hearing. I
suggest that, apart from a few types of situation in which an inquest should be
mandatory (such as cases ofhomicide not followed by conviction and deaths in
custody), the coroner should have discretion to decide (after consultation with interested
parties) whether a public inquest should be held in that individual case or group of
cases. The decision should be subject to an appeal, not only by relatives ofthe
deceased, but also by anyone with a legitimate interest in the case. Coroners should
receive guidance on the types ofissue that will require a public investigation at inquest.
9.105 I realise that it appears that I have recommended a more limited set ofcircumstances
that would call for a public inquest than has the Coroners Review. In one respect, I
certainly have. I do not think that a public inquest is necessary in any case in which it
is necessary to resolve a conflict ofevidence. In my view, that could quite well be done
in private, by the coroner calling the witnesses to give evidence on oath. Interested
parties could be allowed to attend and ask questions ifthey wished. In other respects,
I think the difference between what I suggest and what the Coroners Review has
proposed may be almost semantic. The Review seeks to identify the types of
circumstance in which a public interest will arise. I agree that the list contains
appropriate categories. However, in my view, there may be many other types of
circumstance in which a public interest can arise. It would be well nigh impossible to
compile a complete list. In my view, just because the death fits into a particular category
should not mean that there must be a public inquest. The facts of the individual case
should be examined to see whether they do raise public interest issues.
9.106 Some obvious examples ofcases in which there must be a public interest spring readily
to mind. The public needs to know how and why fatalities have occurred on the public
transport system, at an accident blackspot or because ofa failure ofdesign ofa vehicle
or piece ofequipment. They need to know about a death at the hands ofthe police. If
it appears that a death has been caused by the failure to carry out a proper procedure
in a hospital such that others might be affected by a repetition of the failure, the public
interest may demand a public hearing.
9.107 I also consider that the procedure by which coroners may make recommendations for
future change should be continued, but strengthened. I shall return to this issue in
Chapter Nineteen.
219
SHIP03$$21 25-06-03 12:20:38 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
9.108 It is interesting to note that the Brodrick Committee recommended changes similar to
those I have suggested. They suggested that the coroner should have complete
discretion as to the type ofinvestigation to be carried out. The existing categories of
death in which an inquest had to be held should be swept away. Instead, the only
circumstances in which an inquest should be mandatory would be deaths from
suspected homicide, deaths ofpersons deprived oftheir liberty by society and deaths
ofpersons whose bodies were unidentified. The Committee’s view, expressed over
30 years ago, accords almost exactly with mine.
220
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER TEN
The Role of Pathology in the Coroner Service
Hospital and Coroners’ Autopsies
10.1 I have already referred in Chapter Nine to the role of the autopsy as one of a number of
investigative tools available to the coroner. The purpose of the coroner’s autopsy is to
identify the cause of death and, in particular, to determine, or assist in determining,
whether the death was ‘natural’ or ‘unnatural’. The coroner’s autopsy takes place at the
direction of the coroner; the consent of the deceased’s family is not required. A hospital
or ‘consent’ autopsy is conducted for clinical and/or research purposes. If consent was
not given by the deceased in life, such an autopsy requires the consent of the family.
10.2 In the UK, the number of ‘consent’ autopsies on adults has declined markedly over the
past 30 years, whereas the number of coroners’ autopsies has remained relatively
constant. In 2001, about 130,000 autopsies were conducted in England and Wales. Of
these, 121,000 were coroners’ autopsies. Coroners ordered autopsies in just over 60% of
the 201,000 deaths reported to them. Over 20% of all registered deaths in England and
Wales were followed by autopsy. That is more than twice the rate in both Northern Ireland
and the Republic of Ireland, 10% more than in Scotland and more than many other
jurisdictions.
The Practitioners Who Conduct Autopsies
10.3 The Coroners Rules 1984 provide that post-mortem examinations should be made,
wherever possible, by a pathologist with suitable qualifications and experience.
Forensic Pathologists
10.4 Where there is a suspicion of homicide, the autopsy will be carried out by a pathologist
listed on the Home Office Register of Forensic Pathologists. The police should be
consulted about the choice of pathologist. There are very few (about 36 – reduced from
52 in 1992) forensic pathologists in England and Wales. Of these, almost 50% practise
independently, often carrying out autopsies in public mortuaries that are not attached to
any hospital or other institution. Such public mortuaries are owned and operated by local
authorities. Other forensic pathologists have hospital and university appointments. In
some districts (e.g. Sheffield), the coroner works alongside a university forensic pathology
department and has the benefit of having forensic pathologists to carry out many of
his/her ‘routine’ autopsies. Such arrangements are, however, the exception.
10.5 Forensic pathologists enter into individual service contracts with local police forces. They
also provide services for coroners and others, including defendants in criminal cases.
They have no management structure and the forensic pathologist service is fragmented.
There are perceived problems of lackof training opportunities, uneven standards of
practice, difficulties in managing heavy workloads and lack of opportunity for career
development. These problems have recently been addressed by the Home Office Review
of Forensic Pathology Services in England and Wales, which reported in March 2003.
221
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
I shall refer to the recommendations of that Review later in this Chapter. These problems,
together with many other issues, were also discussed at one of the Inquiry’s seminars,
held on 23rd January 2003, as well as during the course of oral evidence.
Consultant Histopathologists
10.6 In most districts, routine coroners’ autopsies are carried out by histopathologists
employed in local National Health Service (NHS) hospitals. Such histopathologists should
be on the General Medical Council (GMC) specialist register. These practitioners spend
most of their time performing histopathological workin connection with the care of living
patients. Some histopathologists have a particular interest in conducting autopsies and
acquire an expertise in the field. Others are unenthusiastic about the workand do it only
because the hospital is a base for coronial autopsy and it is therefore expected of them.
Pathologists receive a set fee (currently £78.60) for a routine coroner’s autopsy; this is over
and above the salary that they receive in connection with their NHS employment. The
conduct of coroners’ autopsies can be a significant source of additional income and this
factor provides some incentive to do the work. GMC-registered trainees can perform
coroners’ autopsies under the supervision of a trained histopathologist, provided that the
coroner agrees.
Specialist Pathologists
10.7 Certain autopsies are carried out by specialists such as neuropathologists or paediatric
histopathologists. However, skill shortages in these areas can make such autopsies
difficult to arrange. Furthermore, the Inquiry was told that coroners do not always
recognise the need for an autopsy to be carried out by a specialist. The Royal College of
Pathologists (RCPath) is currently considering the possibility of developing a list of
approved specialist pathologists and making this list available to coroners.
Other Practitioners
10.8 Until relatively recently, coroners’ autopsies were carried out on a reasonably frequent
basis by doctors who were not accredited histopathologists. The Inquiry has been told
that the number of medical practitioners without specific training in autopsy practice who
perform autopsies has decreased. However, at the Inquiry’s seminar on pathology, one
participant mentioned that he was aware of general practitioners and a microbiologist who
still carried out such examinations. Another participant said that he also was aware of
general practitioners who currently carried out autopsies.
Problems with Coroners’ Autopsies
The Number of Coroners’ Autopsies Performed
10.9 The Inquiry has heard that there is a substantial body of opinion to the effect that too many
coroners’ autopsies are performed. At the pathology seminar, there was unanimous
support for the suggestion that there should be fewer, better selected coroners’ autopsies.
Dr Anne Thorpe, who represented the British Medical Association (BMA) and is herself a
222
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
consultant in histopathology and cytopathology, said that many autopsies were carried
out by reason of automatic triggers, such as the fact that the deceased had not been seen
by a doctor during the 14 days before death. Such autopsies frequently added nothing to
the knowledge about the deceased or the cause of death. There was a general feeling that
too little importance was attached to the results of in-life investigations, which might
provide a clear diagnosis of cause of death without the need for an invasive autopsy.
Dr Roger Start, another consultant histopathologist, gave examples of autopsies which he
and his colleagues had been required to carry out in cases where robust diagnoses had
been made during life. There was general agreement that a decision as to whether or not
an autopsy should be carried out should be made on a case-by-case basis, rather than
by the application of inflexible rules.
The Shortage of Pathologists
10.10 Considerable concern was expressed about the shortage of both forensic pathologists
and histopathologists. There are few university departments teaching forensic pathology.
Fragmentation of the forensic pathology services means that there are few consultant
posts or training opportunities. As a consequence, there is a lackof training and
experience in the conduct of autopsies among those who have entered the medical
profession more recently. A dramatic reduction in the number of hospital autopsies being
carried out has had the effect of making it difficult for a trainee to gain experience in
carrying out and observing dissection techniques. Some coroners are unwilling to allow
trainees to carry out autopsies on their behalf, even with supervision from a consultant.
10.11 There are other factors that tend to deter histopathologists from carrying out coroners’
autopsies. Some prefer to workwith the living, rather than the dead. The need to attend to
give evidence at inquests on a regular basis can be extremely disruptive of the
pathologist’s other duties. NHS managers tend to view coroners’ autopsies as a
distraction for staff employed to meet the clinical needs of live patients. Histopathologists
may therefore receive no encouragement to perform coroner’s autopsy work. In addition,
the recent, much publicised controversies relating to the retention of organs and tissues
have discouraged some practitioners from becoming involved in coroners’ autopsies.
10.12 Professor James Underwood, President of the RCPath said at the pathology seminar that,
before doctors embarkupon their training, the interest in forensic pathology tends to be
high. However, the lackof pathology in the undergraduate curriculum leads to a
dissipation of that initial interest. The challenge is to nurture and develop it. The RCPath
is working on the development of a modular training programme, which would enable
pathologists to elect whether or not to undergo training in autopsies. This would ensure
that only those with a real interest in performing autopsies underwent the necessary
training. Equally, it would enable a pathologist to specialise in autopsies, either as their
sole activity or alongside some diagnostic workconnected with living patients. Dr Start
pointed out that, as a consultant histopathologist, the only way in which he could carry out
autopsies on a full-time basis under the current system would be to become a forensic
pathologist, which he does not wish to do. He would welcome the introduction of the
opportunity to specialise in the field of autopsy. Plans are also afoot to facilitate the
transition from histopathology to paediatric histopathology, in order to alleviate the acute
223
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
shortage of practitioners within that specialist field. Both Professor Helen Whitwell, who
heads the Forensic Pathology Department at the University of Sheffield, and Professor
Underwood reported that the RCPath is currently considering how training in autopsy
practice can be improved. The Inquiry has also heard about a national strategy to increase
the number of trainees in pathology. Professor Whitwell believed that, if a unified autopsy
service were created, medical professionals would be attracted to workin the field.
The Inadequacy of the Information Available to Pathologists
10.13 Concerns have been expressed by the RCPath and others about the adequacy and
quality of information available to pathologists prior to a coroner’s autopsy. Plainly, if the
pathologist is to place his/her findings in context and properly interpret them, s/he must
have full and accurate information about the deceased’s medical history and the
circumstances of the death.
10.14 At the pathology seminar, Dr Start observed that, while pathologists in his locality had no
difficulty in obtaining the information they required, he was aware that the information
received by some of his colleagues elsewhere was confined to that contained on police
sudden death report forms and could be extremely limited. He was also aware that some
coroners would not make medical records available to pathologists or allow
communication between pathologists and clinicians involved in the deceased’s care. He
said that one of the fundamental problems of the current system was the variation in the
practices of different coroners. Others also referred to the problems caused by lackof
consistency in practice between coroners.
10.15 Professor Whitwell stressed the importance, particularly in a complex case, of discussion
with the clinicians responsible for the deceased’s care. The 2002 Report produced by the
National Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths (NCEPOD) recorded how
clinicians were frequently unaware of the date or time of an autopsy and were often unable
to attend. One surgeon reported to the NCEPOD that the local coroner did not permit
communication between a surgeon involved in the deceased’s care and the pathologist
carrying out the autopsy unless the surgeon had a specific question. Presumably, this
policy is intended to ensure that the pathologist is in a position to provide a wholly
independent opinion. At the seminars, however, Dr Start said that, if he were not permitted
to contact those involved in the deceased’s care in order to obtain the information he
required, it would seriously diminish his ability to provide the best possible autopsy report.
He is fortunate in that he can contact his clinical colleagues and access information about
the patient on the hospital computer. Some coroners will not permit pathologists to do this
when conducting autopsies on the coroner’s behalf.
10.16 The RCPath has advised that a minimum amount of information should be presented to
a pathologist who is instructed to carry out an autopsy following a death occurring in the
community. This information should include the precise circumstances of the death, the
medical history of the deceased and details of any prescribed medications and any recent
hospital admissions. Such information is obviously critical to pathologists if they are to
carry out their taskproperly.
224
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
The Standard of Coroners’ Autopsies
10.17 I have referred in Chapter Nine to the fact that coroners’ autopsies are not always
performed to a high standard. There is general concern that the coroner’s autopsy is often
of lower quality and less thorough than the hospital autopsy. This difference in quality has
been attributed to a number of factors. I have already mentioned the fact that pathologists
carrying out coroners’ autopsies frequently do not have the background information that is
necessary in order to put their examination into context. Often, they do not have the same
opportunity to consult the medical records or discuss the case with clinicians that they
would have if they were conducting a hospital autopsy. The fact that they are carrying out
coroner’s autopsy workin NHS time (or attempting to fit it in before the start of the working
day) may mean that they are under pressure of time. The same pressure of time can arise
if the pathologist has a long list of coroners’ autopsies to undertake on a single day.
Limitations (e.g. as to the histological examination to be carried out) may be imposed by
the coroner, and the pathologist may be under pressure to find a cause of death without
having conducted all the investigations that s/he would wish to conduct before giving a
final opinion. There is no audit or means of quality assurance to ensure that coroners’
autopsies are carried out to a suitable standard. The NHS has no such audit procedures
since the autopsies are not carried out within the pathologist’s NHS employment.
10.18 The RCPath has sought to address these problems by producing a document, ‘Guidelines
on autopsy practice’, which was published in September 2002. A copy of the document
has been sent to every coroner in England and Wales. Thus, it is hoped, coroners will at
least be able to compare the service that they are currently receiving against the
standards set out in the Guidelines. Also, the RCPath is developing minimum standards
for autopsies relating to specific types of death. The standards are intended to alert
pathologists as to how they should be doing their work. If a coroner refuses to allow the
pathologist to include within his/her examination an element (e.g. the taking of a tissue
sample for histology) that the pathologist regards as necessary in order to give a full and
reliable opinion, the pathologist will be able to rely on the Guidelines in support of his/her
request that permission be granted. If it is not, the pathologist may decline to conduct the
autopsy.
10.19 Both Professor Underwood, for the RCPath, and Professor Margaret Brazier, Chair of the
Retained Organs Commission, agreed with Dr Peter Goldblatt of the Office for National
Statistics that the content of a properly conducted autopsy should be given the
endorsement of the law, possibly by means of a code of practice with statutory force.
10.20 The RCPath is anxious to ensure that the standards to which coroners’ autopsies are
carried out should be the same as those applicable to hospital autopsies and that the
benefits derived from both types of autopsy should be the same.
The Future Delivery of Autopsy Services
10.21 The shortage of forensic pathologists, together with perceived problems with the
organisation of the forensic pathology service, has led recently, as I have already
explained, to a Home Office Review. From that Review emerged the suggestion that a
225
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
central body should be created to manage the service and to tackle the various problems
confronting it. The Review concluded that, given the close involvement of the forensic
pathology service with the criminal justice and coronial systems, both of which are
currently administered in part by the Home Office, the responsibility for the management
of the forensic pathology service should also lie with the Home Office. The other option
which had been considered was to place the service within the jurisdiction of the
Department of Health (DoH) by, for example, creating a new Special Health Authority.
10.22 The Review tookthe view that direct control of the forensic pathology service by a
Government Department would be undesirable. Instead, it suggested that the service
should be at arm’s length from the Home Office. The solution eventually recommended
was that the forensic pathology service should be integrated into the existing Forensic
Science Service, which is an Executive Agency of the Home Office.
10.23 It was further recommended that specialist regional service delivery centres (centres of
excellence) should be established, providing a base for forensic pathologists and suitable
mortuary facilities, as well as facilities for histology processing and other purposes.
10.24 It was suggested at the Inquiry’s pathology seminar (which tookplace before the Review
reported) that there should be a unified service which would deliver the whole range of
pathology services, including those required for routine coroners’ autopsies. The service
would employ, not just the relatively few forensic pathologists doing mainly cases with a
criminal involvement, but also histopathologists performing autopsy work. Although the
RCPath is not directly concerned with the organisation and management of pathology
services, Professor Underwood, representing the College, supported the idea of a freestanding,
independent service, with functions to include a duty to provide autopsy and
other related services to the coroner.
10.25 At present, responsibility for pathology services is split between the Home Office and the
DoH. The College’s view was that this arrangement did not benefit either the public or the
profession. Professor Underwood observed that the logical place for all autopsy services
was within the DoH, possibly by way of a Special Health Authority. It would then be
possible for an NHS consultant to spend most of his/her professional time working in
hospital, dealing with disease in living patients, but to be contracted to carry out autopsy
workfor the new service on a sessional basis.
10.26 Under the working model set out in the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper, the Inquiry envisaged
that there would be regional coroner’s offices, preferably situated at or near to the forensic
pathology centres of excellence. There would also be a larger number of district coroner’s
offices. The district offices would be served by local histopathologists with a particular
interest and expertise in autopsy. External examinations and autopsies would be carried
out in the mortuaries of local hospitals. At the pathology seminar, Dr William Lawler,
representing the British Association in Forensic Medicine, was supportive of such an
arrangement. He envisaged that the regional forensic pathology centres would deal with
the more complex cases, including many of those involving criminality. The centres would
also play a part in training and could provide a career structure, as well as the specialised
facilities already mentioned.
226
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
10.27 Professor Underwood, representing the RCPath, spoke of the importance of pathologists
having the appropriate skills for the particular examination to be undertaken. For example,
in a case where a deceased person had been in intensive care for some time prior to
death, a knowledge of intensive care procedures and the changes in the living body which
can result from those procedures was required. It was to be hoped that the provision of a
unified service would enable a variety of such skills to be developed and to be made
available at a regional, if not a district, level. Professor Whitwell referred to the need for
specialists in maternal deaths, a need not always recognised by coroners. The
requirement for a specialist to conduct autopsies in perinatal deaths is more widely
recognised. Professor Whitwell also mentioned the need for facilities to carry out
radiology, which, in her view, is under-used at present in post-mortem investigations.
10.28 At present, coroners’ autopsies are conducted outside the NHS, although they are
usually conducted by an NHS employee, in the mortuary of an NHS hospital, with the
assistance of other staff employed by the NHS and often within the hours of the
pathologist’s NHS employment. However, because the autopsies are commissioned by
coroners, the NHS has no control over how they are performed. There is no audit of
coronial autopsy reports and no quality assurance. The autopsy report will usually be
received by a coroner who has no medical expertise and is therefore not in a position
to judge the adequacy or acceptability of its contents. Professor Whitwell expressed the
view that it would be appropriate for the NHS to assume responsibility for a patient up
to the point of disposal of the body, rather than, as at present, merely up to the point
of death. If the new service were based within the health sector, this could be done.
Placement within the health sector would also enable there to be proper quality control
of autopsies. It would mean that issues such as communication with relatives about
autopsies, organ and tissue donation and other relevant matters could be dealt with in
a consistent manner, whether the autopsy was being undertaken by consent or at the
direction of the coroner. This view was supported by Dr Stephen Leadbeatter (Director
of the Wales Institute of Forensic Medicine), Dr Start and Professor Brazier. Professor
Brazier said that the Retained Organs Commission would endorse the idea of a Special
Health Authority providing pathology services independent from the NHS. She felt that
such an arrangement would help to provide quality, as well as consistency, of service.
10.29 For the BMA, Dr Thorpe stressed the need for pathologists to be independent of the
NHS. At present, autopsies in cases where there is a suggestion of wrongdoing on the
part of the clinical team responsible for caring for the deceased are carried out on the
instructions of the coroner. He or she can instruct the pathologist of his/her choice, with
the experience which s/he deems necessary. If, for any reason, the pathologist is
unwilling to carry out the autopsy (e.g. because s/he knows the deceased’s family has
complained about the deceased’s care or s/he does not feel s/he possesses the right
skills), the coroner will instruct another pathologist. There are fears within the profession
that, if a system were to be created whereby a hospital trust contracted to provide
pathology services for the coroner, there would be pressure on pathologists to carry
out autopsies in circumstances where it would be inappropriate for them to do so. That
problem would not arise if pathology services were provided by a free-standing,
independent pathology service.
227
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
The Purpose of the Autopsy
10.30 The purpose of the hospital autopsy is to increase medical knowledge, either in relation
to the particular case or more generally. The autopsy may also reveal genetic features
relevant to other members of the deceased’s family. It may add to the family’s
understanding of the death and may help them come to terms with their loss. It can be
used for the purposes of audit and research.
10.31 Over recent years, the number of hospital autopsies has declined markedly. There are a
number of reasons for this. Professor Underwood, representing the RCPath, said that one
reason was a misplaced confidence by clinicians in ante-mortem diagnoses of causes of
death. Clinicians no longer regard autopsies as important and do not request them. In
addition, following the recent controversies about the retention of organs and tissues,
there is heightened suspicion on the part of the public about the purpose of autopsies and
a reluctance on the part of doctors to askfor consent for an autopsy to be conducted. The
procedures which have to be undertaken in order to obtain consent are, the Inquiry was
told, in themselves a deterrent. Furthermore, the general pressure on the pathology
services has made the performance of hospital autopsies less attractive. Nevertheless,
there was a general view among participants at the pathology seminar that hospital
autopsies had an important role to play in the understanding of disease and the audit of
clinical care.
10.32 Hospital autopsies are generally carried out in the hospital where the deceased died. The
pathologist has access to the latest information about the deceased’s medical history. He
or she has contact with the clinicians who were responsible for the deceased’s care. The
autopsy is carried out within the pathologist’s employment with the NHS and the results
are made available to clinicians.
10.33 In its 2002 Report, the NCEPOD drew a distinction between hospital and coroners’
autopsies. It suggested that the coroner’s autopsy had lost its linkwith clinical medicine.
As a consequence, it was failing to provide lessons which clinicians needed to learn in
order to understand the patient’s death. It observed that clinicians were feeling more and
more disillusioned and frustrated with the information obtained from coroners’ autopsies,
which may not help in the understanding of a patient’s death. The problem, the Report
observed, appeared to be that the information required by a coroner from an autopsy was
quite different from that required by clinicians. The Report said that the current system put
limits on the quality of information that a pathologist can contribute to his/her clinical
colleagues and upon his/her ability to function within a team. The RCPath has also
expressed concern that the potential benefits that could accrue to society from the large
number of coroners’ autopsies undertaken in England and Wales are not being realised.
This has become particularly important at a time when the number of hospital autopsies
being undertaken is declining and is now such a small proportion (about 10%) of the total
number of autopsies being conducted.
10.34 Quite apart from the frequent lackof communication between pathologists and clinicians
before coroners’ autopsies are conducted, there is often a lackof communication after the
autopsy. Autopsy reports are not always made available to the clinicians who treated the
deceased. Thus, the potential for harnessing valuable information gleaned on autopsy is
228
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
lost. Sometimes, the reports of coroners’ autopsies are in any event superficial, dealing
only with the immediate cause of death diagnosed and containing little information of
interest to the clinician.
10.35 Professor Whitwell gave the example of the elderly person who dies with dementia. If the
cause of death was bronchopneumonia, most coroners will be satisfied with ‘pneumonia
due to dementia’ as the cause of death. The type of dementia cannot be ascertained
without detailed neuropathological examination of the brain. If the relatives knew that such
an examination were possible or that it might be of benefit to them and to others, they might
well be happy for such an examination to go ahead. But, with the coroner’s autopsy, the
relatives will not usually be informed of the possibility of such an examination and the
opportunity will therefore be missed.
10.36 At the seminars, there was discussion about the aims and purposes of a coroner’s
autopsy. There was a general view among the pathologists that, once a decision had been
taken to perform an autopsy, whether by consent or for the coroner, the autopsy should
be carried out as thoroughly as possible. Professor Underwood, for the RCPath, observed
that it is only by reliably ascertaining the cause of the death that a picture of the health of
the nation can be developed and that changing patterns of disease incidence can be
observed which, in turn, might lead to the discovery of new causes of disease. He said
that the autopsy made a very important contribution to public health.
10.37 Professor Brazier, for the Retained Organs Commission, said that, in her experience, once
a decision has been taken to perform an autopsy, most families wish the maximum amount
of useful information possible to come out of it, both for their own benefit and for the benefit
of others. She felt that the crucial factor was that the family should be given a full
explanation of what was going to be done and why. She acknowledged that there would
be a small minority of families for whom any form of autopsy is a violation of their personal
faith or personal convictions and who would want the autopsy to be as narrowly focussed
as possible.
10.38 In general, however, there was a strong feeling that all autopsies, whether carried out by
consent or at the direction of the coroner, should be carried out with the same
thoroughness and to the same high standard.
External Examination
10.39 The RCPath Guidelines criticise the practice whereby a mortuary technician is permitted
to remove and dissect organs before the pathologist has checked the identity of the
deceased and carried out an examination of the external surfaces of the body. The effect
of this practice may be to destroy signs that should be observed by the pathologist and
thus to impair the value of the autopsy. In her evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Whitwell
strongly supported the College’s position on this issue.
10.40 At the seminars, the potential of an external examination of the body as a possible
alternative to the full autopsy was discussed. Professor Whitwell was of the view that
careful assessment of clinical records and death scene circumstances, coupled with a
thorough external examination of the body, could potentially reduce the number of cases
229
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
in which an autopsy was required. These steps could be combined with random
toxicology in some cases.
10.41 At the seminars, Dr Start referred to the difficulty, even for an experienced pathologist like
himself, in distinguishing between external marks (e.g. bruising) which were, or might
have been, caused by violence and those which were innocent in origin. The taskwas
particularly difficult where a patient had been subjected to vigorous treatment by
paramedics or staff in an accident and emergency department. Such treatment might give
rise to marks on the body. Dr Start said that the tendency of pathologists at present is to
overlookmarks (e.g. bruising in an elderly patient living in a care home), because of
ignorance of how properly to interpret the marks.
10.42 Dr Start observed that, if external examination were going to be performed by health
professionals other than pathologists, or by persons other than health professionals, a
significant amount of training would be needed. Professor Whitwell said that, for some
time, there had been a lackof training among doctors in basic forensic medicine, such as
bruise and wound interpretation. Professor Underwood, for the RCPath, agreed. He said
that, if doctors were to be required to undertake detailed external examinations of bodies,
the GMC would have to ensure that proper training was in place.
10.43 Dr Lawler, for the British Association in Forensic Medicine, envisaged a two-stage
process whereby the initial screener, who need not be medically qualified but must be
carefully trained, would carry out an external examination according to a protocol. If
anything untoward was observed, that person would raise the alert and a further
examination by a medically qualified person (probably a pathologist) would follow. That
sort of arrangement exists informally at present. Dr Lawler said that he knew of homicide
cases where enquiries into the death had been initiated as a result of information given
by mortuary technicians who had identified suspicious features on bodies received at the
mortuary.
10.44 Both Professor Underwood and Dr Lawler raised a note of caution as to the likely accuracy
of diagnoses of causes of death based on external examination of the body. Dr Lawler
observed that it would inevitably result in less accurate determinations of the cause of
death than if a full autopsy had been carried out. Research into the efficacy of external
examination by trained personnel as a way of diagnosing cause of death would have to
be undertaken.
The Partial Autopsy
10.45 There was discussion at the pathology seminar about the value of partial autopsies, limited
to only a part, or certain parts, of the body. This idea had been canvassed in evidence and
had received little support from witnesses or from respondents to the Discussion Paper.
Two possible circumstances in which a partial autopsy might be appropriate were
suggested. First, where an unequivocal cause of death (e.g. a ruptured aortic aneurysm)
was found at an early stage of the investigation and the deceased’s family were known to
be opposed to the principle of an autopsy. Second, where there was a riskof infection (e.g.
from brain tissue) and a cause of death was found before the brain was examined. In
230
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
evidence, Dr Martin Gillett, a consultant histopathologist who frequently carries out
coroners’ autopsies, said that there were occasions when he received a message from the
coroner to the effect that, if he found a cause of death that did not involve opening the skull,
he was not to proceed to open the skull, as the relatives had asked that this should not
be done.
10.46 For the RCPath, Professor Underwood said that he could see a role for the partial autopsy
in the context of a hospital autopsy, where the purpose of the autopsy might be to answer
a specific question about the nature of the disease. He did not thinkthat a partial autopsy
in a coroner’s case would be appropriate. In its Guidelines, the College had stated its view
that any autopsy carried out should be as full, and of as high a quality, as possible and
should address all questions relating to the death. Professor Brazier, on behalf of the
Retained Organs Commission, tookthe view that, in the majority of cases, it was the initial
intrusion upon the body that gave rise to the distress felt by families. Once the process had
begun, provided that the family were properly informed about what was to happen, they
would usually accept a full examination, particularly since that might result in findings (e.g.
about genetic disease) which would benefit other family members. Also, she felt that, if the
family had been led to expect a limited examination only, and the expected cause of death
was not found, there might have to be further discussions about extending the
examination, which would be more distressing than if a full examination had taken place
in the first instance. Other participants, all of them pathologists, were doubtful about the
value of partial autopsies and were concerned about the potentially valuable information
which would be lost by limiting the extent of the examination. Dr Start pointed out that the
standards set by the RCPath were intended to be applicable to all autopsies. A suggestion
that some autopsies might be partial would introduce a ‘grey area’ and might expose the
pathologist to criticism if s/he did not comply in full with the standards.
10.47 During the course of discussion at the pathology seminar, I pointed out that, where an
autopsy was being imposed upon a family against their wishes, or those previously voiced
by the deceased, it was difficult to see how an examination going further than was
necessary to establish the cause of the death could be justified. I suggested that, in such
a case, it would be a matter for the coroner to agree with the family limitations on the extent
of the autopsy and to give appropriate guidance to the pathologist. In response, Professor
Brazier voiced her belief that, if families had clear explanations, only a few would seek
restrictions. She agreed that there was a place for compromise but observed that it would
be extremely difficult to negotiate such a compromise, bearing in mind that the position
could change once the examination started. She also stressed the need for absolute
clarity of the pathologist’s position.
The Use of Non-Invasive Techniques
10.48 In recent years, there has been increased interest in various non-invasive or minimally
invasive post-mortem investigations such as magnetic resonance (MR) scanning,
thoracoscopy, laparoscopy, radiology and needle biopsy with histology, as alternatives
to the full invasive autopsy. Such techniques have particular attractions for those minority
groups who hold strong religious and cultural objections to the invasive autopsy. In
Manchester, for example, the use of MR scanning has been pioneered by Dr Rob Bisset,
231
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
a consultant radiologist at the North Manchester General Hospital. The Jewish community
has paid for scans to be carried out on its members where an invasive autopsy would
otherwise have been necessary and, where Dr Bisset has been able to identify a cause of
death from the scan, the coroner has certified that cause of death.
10.49 Dr Bisset told the Inquiry that MR scanning gives excellent results in some areas of the
body. However, he acknowledged that it has limitations. It cannot detect metabolic
disease, nor can it at present define the coronary arteries. With more powerful resolution
in the future, the latter should be possible. Dr Bisset has carried out MR scanning in a
relatively small number of cases. He observed that scanning had produced a cause of
death in the majority of those cases without recourse to an invasive autopsy. Others have
pointed out that there has been little research as yet as to the quality of the correlation
between the causes of death reached as a result of MR scanning and those which would
have been diagnosed on invasive autopsy.
10.50 Dr Bisset said that there is a shortage of MR scanners in the UK. The one which he uses
is privately owned and is therefore available for use upon payment. Dr Bisset also pointed
out that there is an even greater shortage of radiologists. He observed that, as things are
at present, the pressure on the use of MR scanners for live patients is so great that use of
scanning for post-mortem investigations on a large scale is unlikely to be acceptable to
the public other than in relation to neonatal deaths. In a letter to the Inquiry, the Royal
College of Radiologists referred to the need for further research to identify more clearly the
limitations of MR scanning in ascertaining the cause of death. The College supports such
research, but has serious concerns about the general introduction of MR scanning postmortem.
Its letter referred to the shortage of scanners, radiologists and radiographers and
pointed out that waiting lists for living patients are very long.
10.51 Dr Ian Barnes, a pathology modernisation adviser to the DoH, referred to a study which
had recently been commissioned by the Department. This had concluded that the
research evidence as to the effectiveness of non-invasive techniques of post-mortem
examination was at present limited. The Department was currently seeking funding to
conduct more detailed research. There was considerable support at the seminars for
further exploration of the potential of non-invasive techniques to provide an alternative to
autopsy, at least in some cases. Professor Underwood said that the RCPath would
welcome a well-funded research study. There was a need to research and audit the
accuracy of the techniques. However, Professor Brazier emphasised that, even if other
techniques came into regular use, it was important that families should be made aware of
the limitations of those techniques and of the fact that invasive autopsy may ultimately be
necessary in their particular case.
Histopathology
10.52 In its 2002 Guidelines, the RCPath stated that:
‘Diagnostic or confirmatory histopathology should be done in all cases,
subject to the requirements of the Human Tissue Act 1961 and the
instructions of the Coroner.’
232
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
10.53 As I have already mentioned, coroners’ attitudes to the taking and retaining of samples for
histology vary widely, particularly since the recent controversies about organ and tissue
retention. Pathologists are sometimes prevented by coroners from taking tissue samples
which the pathologist believes are necessary in order to establish or confirm the cause of
death. The only course open to the pathologist in those circumstances is to decline to state
a cause of death before histology has been done. Often, however, the pathologist might
be able to state a provisional cause, in which case some coroners would not permit
histology. Funding for histology can also be a problem. In the past, hospitals were
prepared to carry out basic histology without charge. This is less common today. The
Inquiry heard of one coroner who will pay for histology only in a case where an industrial
disease is believed to have caused the death. If a pathologist in that area feels that
histology is necessary in a non-industrial disease case, s/he takes it, but neither s/he nor
the hospital receives any payment for it. If a great deal of histological investigation is
required in a non-industrial disease case, the coroner will sometimes agree to pay on a
‘one-off’ basis.
10.54 At the pathology seminar, Professor Underwood, for the RCPath, emphasised the fact that
an organ or tissue which looks normal to the naked eye at autopsy may well be found to
be abnormal if examined microscopically. He also referred to the College’s view (shared
by the BMA) that tissue blocks and slides which have been subjected to histological
examination should be retained as part of the deceased’s medical records. Examples of
cases in which this is of value are deaths stated to be caused by Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome where the occurrence of a second similar death in the family, or the advance
of medical science, might make it necessary for the death to be re-appraised. It is also
sometimes desirable in criminal cases. In the case of a coroner’s autopsy, organs and
tissues may be retained only for such period as the coroner thinks fit. Sometimes, coroners
refuse to allow material to be retained in circumstances where the pathologist believes it
is necessary. Obviously, there is a need for consistency of practice in those cases where
there is a real medical need for retention.
10.55 Professor Brazier explained that the Retained Organs Commission was recommending
the creation of an authority to regulate collections of organs and tissues taken for noncoronial
purposes. She agreed that, in the future, coroners might have to adjudicate on the
retention of material taken during coroners’ autopsies but stressed that they would have to
be clear as to the purposes for which the material was being retained.
10.56 Dr Start referred to the uncertainty on the part of pathologists as to what they can and
cannot do in terms of histology. He stressed the need to validate the observations made
with the naked eye and to discover whether the pathologist’s belief about the disease
processes present was correct. He regarded this as vital to maintaining the quality of
autopsies. On occasions, the finding on histology can produce surprises that wholly
change the pathologist’s view of the case. Moreover, the present system, whereby
different coroners operate different rules about the taking of histology, would prevent the
effective policing of the quality of all autopsies in accordance with the RCPath’s new
Guidelines.
10.57 Dr Start observed that the establishment of a unified autopsy service, especially with
in-house histopathology, would mean that the histological element of the autopsy was
233
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
accorded a greater priority than at present when, in a busy histopathology department,
histology associated with coroners’ autopsies comes at the bottom of the pile. Delay in
informing relatives of the cause of death causes distress and diminishes the value of the
examination. Sufficient support staff should be available to deliver a quality service.
Toxicology
10.58 Most forms of toxicological death will not show any specific features on autopsy, although
there may be non-specific findings and a history suggestive of the cause. Sometimes,
needle marks may be evident on an examination with the naked eye or tablet material may
be seen among the gastric contents. However, toxicology is necessary to establish the
cause of death. In a young person who dies with no evident macroscopic cause of death,
toxicological analysis will generally (and, according to Professor Whitwell, should always)
be undertaken. However, toxicology is much less frequently carried out among the elderly
since, in an elderly person, there is usually some condition evident on autopsy which could
constitute a plausible cause of death.
10.59 In the case of many, if not all, of Shipman’s victims, if an autopsy had been carried out in
the absence of toxicology, it is highly unlikely that the true cause of their deaths would have
been revealed. Certainly, this was so in the case of Mr Charles Barlow, one of Shipman’s
victims, who was subjected to an autopsy. I have referred to Mr Barlow’s case in Chapter
Nine of this Report. In some jurisdictions, much greater use is made of toxicology. It is
performed in conjunction with virtually every autopsy and is also carried out in some cases
where there is no autopsy. The Inquiry was told about the experience in Maryland, USA,
which is that ‘random’ toxicology of this type throws up some surprising results. Drugs
have been found in babies, young children and the very elderly. Indeed, a response to the
Inquiry’s Discussion Paper from a consultant histopathologist in London related how, at
the time of the Shipman trial, he undertooka coroner’s autopsy on an elderly woman found
dead at home. There was no history of suspicious circumstances and ample evidence of
coronary heart disease. He gave the cause of death as ischaemic heart disease but, out
of interest, sent a blood sample for toxicological examination. When the results were
returned, he found that there had been a fatal overdose of anti-depressants. It seems likely
that, if greater use were made of random toxicology, some deaths which would otherwise
be characterised as ‘natural’ would be discovered to have resulted from the
administration, or self-administration, of a drug.
10.60 In England and Wales, samples taken for toxicology usually consist of blood, urine
and/or stomach contents; on occasions, tissues are also taken. Tests for alcohol (and,
often, a drugs screen) are carried out in all deaths by road traffic accident. Dr Lawler
explained that the first drugs screen is qualitative only, in that it reveals the presence of a
drug. If further quantitative testing is necessary, this can take a considerable time and is
expensive.
10.61 Professor Whitwell, who works alongside a medical professor of toxicology, pointed out
that the interpretation of post-mortem toxicology can be extremely complex. In some
laboratories, with no medical input, the interpretation of testing may be inaccurate. In the
long term, she would like to see toxicology departments, with medical expertise, available
234
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
at the regional centres of excellence previously referred to. In the shorter term, regional
centres could deal with the more straightforward cases (e.g. many of those involving
alcohol) and could refer the more complex cases to the specialist toxicological centres,
such as the one at Sheffield.
10.62 Dr Start said that, at present, routine screening by the University of Sheffield Department
in suicide and road traffic accident cases costs, on average, about £225 per case.
Coroners were understandably reluctant to incur this level of cost in all but those cases
where it was obviously necessary to do so. As a result, toxicology is not carried out in some
cases where the pathologist might feel it to be justified.
10.63 Professor Whitwell pointed out that the cost of £225 would include both quantitative and
qualitative screening. Her understanding is that urine, which is available in the majority of
cases, can be screened for the presence (as opposed to the quantity) of alcohol and
drugs much more cheaply than this figure, and within a short time. Her view was that the
aim should be to use screening toxicology in virtually every autopsy. Professor Kevin Park,
Professor of Pharmacology at the University of Liverpool, said that, with greater
throughput and the technological advances that are likely to be made, he would expect
the cost of toxicology to reduce in the future. For the DoH, Dr Barnes pointed out that, as
well as improved technology, there was a need to train and recruit skilled technical and
scientific staff to produce analytical data and to interpret that data.
10.64 Dr Lawler drew attention to the fact that, in some cases, a urine screen may be negative,
but sampling of the blood may show the presence of a lethal substance. He gave the
example of a case in which he had been involved recently, where there was a fatal level
of morphine present in the blood which, because the individual had died rapidly after
administration of the drug, was not present in the urine. He pointed out that this had
particular significance in the context of Shipman’s mode of killing.
10.65 Professor Underwood, for the RCPath, agreed with a suggestion that there should be a
protocol governing toxicological investigations which should deal with matters such as
identifying the drugs to be tested for, the samples which should be taken, how long after
death the samples should be taken and from where in the body.
Challenge to the Decision to Hold or Not to Hold an Autopsy
10.66 If homicide is suspected, it is plain that the public interest in holding an autopsy would
outweigh any individual view as to whether the autopsy should be held. In all other cases
however, there was general support for a right to challenge the decision to be given to
properly interested parties, provided that the challenge could be mounted and resolved
speedily. For the Retained Organs Commission, Professor Brazier supported the right to
challenge a decision to hold an autopsy. She emphasised the need for the challenge to
be dealt with swiftly. She also observed that the right should be real, in that the family
should fully understand the processes involved and be able to make their challenge
effectively and with appropriate support. She herself was concerned that a right to legal
representation might draw out the appeal process and would create funding issues.
However, some members of the Commission are, she reported, concerned that, without
235
SHIP03$$22 25-06-03 12:24:58 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
legal representation, the right of challenge for many people could not be exercised
effectively. Professor Brazier also considered that there should be a right for families to
request an autopsy in a case where the coroner did not regard one as necessary.
However, the family would have to advance a valid argument in order to justify the use of
resources in their particular case.
10.67 For the RCPath, Professor Underwood observed that an American colleague of his refers
to autopsies as ‘information therapy’, meaning that the family can derive benefit, comfort
and satisfaction from knowing the reason for their loss. He suggested that it should be a
part of the NHS bereavement service that relatives should have the opportunity of a
publicly funded autopsy. This would be another facet of the principle previously
discussed that the NHS should assume responsibility for a patient until the time of disposal
of his/her body.
Conclusions
10.68 It is clear that, at present, there are serious deficiencies with some coroners’ autopsies.
Autopsies are conducted in circumstances where they are unnecessary. Insufficient
thought is given to whether the result of medical investigations carried out in life provide
an adequate diagnosis of the cause of the death. Often, pathologists are supplied with
information that is wholly insufficient to enable them to place their findings in context.
Sometimes, they are prevented from seeing the medical records or from conferring with
their clinical colleagues. As in other respects, the approach of coroners varies widely from
district to district, making it difficult for a pathologist to know what s/he can and cannot do.
10.69 Coroners’ autopsies are focussed on a specific purpose. The results are often not
disseminated to clinicians. Even if they are, they may not be very helpful for clinical
purposes. The potential benefit of the coroner’s autopsy to increase medical knowledge
is frequently lost. Moreover, families do not derive the benefit from, for example, genetic
features ascertainable on autopsy and are often unaware that the opportunity to derive
such benefit exists.
10.70 All these problems plainly need addressing. I wholeheartedly support the efforts of the
RCPath to do so by way of the Guidelines, which I have mentioned and the minimum
standards which they are currently developing.
10.71 Any future coroner service will be dependent on an efficient, high quality autopsy service
to support and assist its investigations into deaths. Given the current problems with
pathology provision, the recommendation of a unified pathology service seems to me an
excellent one. I agree with the RCPath that it should include, not only Home Office
registered forensic pathologists, but also those histopathologists who wish to conduct an
autopsy practice, whether full-time or part-time. It should also include facilities for
histology, toxicology, radiology and other necessary support services. In Chapter
Nineteen, I shall set out my recommendations for the future of the service and for the place
that it should occupy within the structure of Government.
236
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Cremation Certification
Introduction
11.1 Despite the many attempts to introduce change, current procedures for obtaining
authorisation to cremate a body remain little altered since their introduction in 1903. The
procedures are still governed by the 1930 Regulations (as amended).
11.2The cremation procedures require the use of a number of forms prescribed in the 1930
Regulations. However, no single ‘standard’ set of forms is produced and distributed by the
Home Office or any other central body. Instead, each cremation authority provides its own
‘personalised’ set of forms. Over the years, some authorities have modified the forms, by
adding explanatory notes, changing the layout slightly and, in some cases, adding
supplementary questions. There is no requirement that crematoria should submit their
forms to the Home Office for approval and, in general, they do not do so.
11.3 Evidence given to the Inquiry suggests that most crematoria have no formal procedure for
regular review of their cremation forms. Instead, the staff tend to wait until a new supply of
forms is required before introducing any changes. Supplies of forms are held by funeral
directors, hospitals and by some general practices. After a new version of the forms is
issued by a crematorium, it takes some time for supplies of the old forms to be exhausted.
For a time (sometimes years), completed forms of both the old and the new style will
continue to be submitted. When a death occurs outside the area usually covered by the
crematorium where a deceased is to be cremated, it is not uncommon for the forms
submitted to be issued by a different crematorium. In general, that causes no problems.
However, difficulties can arise where the requirements imposed by the forms issued by
the two crematoria differ. An example of this is when the crematorium where the cremation
is to be held has a requirement that one of questions 5–8 of cremation Form C should be
answered in the affirmative, whereas the crematorium from which the forms originate
does not.
11.4 Specimen cremation forms can be seen at Appendix D to this Report. Those included in
the Appendix are the forms used at the Dukinfield crematorium, where most of Shipman’s
patients were cremated.
The Application for Cremation: Form A
11.5 The Application for Cremation (Form A) is usually completed by the deceased’s closest
relative or his/her executor. Included on the form are questions about the date, time and
place of the deceased’s death. The applicant is required to state whether s/he knows of
any reason to suspect that the death of the deceased was due, directly or indirectly, to
violence, poison, privation or neglect. The applicant is also asked whether s/he knows of
any reason whatever for supposing that an examination of the remains of the deceased
may be desirable. Those two questions are invariably answered in the negative; if the facts
were such as to lead to either question being answered in the affirmative, the death is likely
to have been reported to the coroner. The applicant is asked to state the name and
237
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
address of the ordinary medical attendant of the deceased and the names and addresses
of the medical practitioners who attended the deceased during his/her last illness.
11.6 The form must be countersigned by a person who knows the applicant and is prepared to
certify that s/he has no reason to doubt the truth of any of the information furnished by the
applicant. In practice, Form A is frequently completed by the funeral director making the
cremation arrangements (after obtaining the necessary information from the applicant)
and the applicant merely signs the form. It is usual for a representative of the funeral
director to countersign the form.
The Certificate of Medical Attendant: Form B
11.7 The Certificate of Medical Attendant (Form B) must be completed by a medical
practitioner who has attended the deceased before death and has seen and identified the
deceased’s body after death. This form asks a number of questions about the
circumstances and cause of the death and about the certifying doctor’s involvement with
the deceased before death. Form B is usually completed by the same doctor who has
issued the MCCD. If an early decision has been made by the relatives to have a cremation,
Form B may be completed at the same time as the MCCD. More often, however, it is
completed slightly later, sometimes after registration of the death has taken place. The
doctor completing Form B receives a fee, currently recommended at £45.50. This fee is
recommended by the British Medical Association (BMA) and is usually increased
annually.
11.8 Included on Form B are questions about the date, time and place of the deceased’s death.
The certifying doctor is asked if s/he is a relative of the deceased and, if so, to state the
relationship. The doctor is also asked whether s/he has any pecuniary interest in the death
of the deceased. Neither the form nor the Regulations make clear what the effect of such
relationship or pecuniary interest may be; in particular, there is no indication that the
existence of either disqualifies a doctor from certifying. In practice, however, rarely – if
ever – is either of these two questions answered in the affirmative.
11.9 The certifying doctor is asked (at question 5) if s/he was the ordinary medical attendant of
the deceased and, if so, for how long. The term ‘ordinary medical attendant’ can cause
some difficulty when the deceased has been in hospital for only a short time prior to death.
The question then arises as to whether a doctor who treated the deceased in hospital can
properly be described as his/her ‘ordinary medical attendant’ or whether the
deceased’s general practitioner (who may know little of his/her last days) is the
appropriate person to certify. There appears to be no consistency of approach. However,
the next question (question 6) is more important. That asks whether the certifying doctor
attended the deceased during the last illness and, if so, for how long. The words
‘attended’ and ‘last illness’ are not defined within the cremation legislation. Nor, as I have
pointed out in Chapter Five, are those terms defined in the legislation governing
certification of the medical cause of death.
11.10 Question 7 requires the certifying doctor to say when (by reference to hours and days
before death) s/he last saw the deceased alive. Question 8(a) asks how soon after death
238
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the doctor saw the body and, on the Dukinfield crematorium Form B, there is a reminder
that the certifying doctor must see the body after death. This is in contrast to the MCCD,
where there is no legal requirement that the certifying doctor should have seen the body
after death.
11.11 The Form B doctor is then asked (by question 8(b)) what examination of the body s/he has
made. In Shipman’s case, the reply was almost always that he had made a ‘complete
external examination’; other doctors use similar descriptions, some indicating that they
have examined for signs of life. Form B does not require the doctor completing it to state
what findings were made on examination (or, indeed, precisely what examination was
carried out) and this is virtually never stated.
11.12As I have said in Chapter Three, question 8A was introduced by the Cremation
(Amendment) Regulations 1985 and asks:
‘If the deceased died in a hospital at which he was an in-patient, has a
post-mortem examination been made by a registered medical
practitioner of not less than five years’ standing who is neither a relative
of the deceased nor a relative or partner of yours and are the results of
that examination known to you?’
11.13 The purpose of this question was to dispense with the need for Form C to be completed
if the Form B doctor was aware of the results of an autopsy and had used that knowledge
to inform his/her diagnosis of the cause of death. The post-mortem examination referred
to is a ‘consent’ or ‘hospital’ examination, rather than an autopsy directed by a coroner.
11.14 In practice, Form B doctors rarely answer question 8A in the affirmative. Even when they
do, it is not unusual for Form C also to be completed, despite the fact that it is not required.
As has frequently been pointed out since its introduction, question 8A is unsatisfactory in
a number of respects. The Form B doctor is not required to identify the practitioner who
performed the autopsy; thus, it is not possible for the medical referee to check that the
practitioner has the necessary five years’ registration. It is not uncommon for trainees to
carry out hospital autopsies, in which case a Form C (usually completed by the
supervising pathologist) is still required. Also, question 8A contains a number of
constituent parts and a negative answer can be ambiguous. For example, it is not possible
to determine, if the question is answered in the negative, whether there has been no
post-mortem or whether there has been a post-mortem, but the results of it are not known
to the Form B doctor. Some crematoria (e.g. Newcastle-upon-Tyne) have sought to solve
this difficulty by splitting question 8A into two separate questions.
11.15 Question 9 requires the certifying doctor to state the cause of death in essentially the same
way as on the MCCD. Question 10 asks about the mode and duration of death. Examples
of possible modes (syncope, coma, exhaustion and convulsions) are given on the form.
This question has been much criticised. The medical referees who gave evidence to the
Inquiry were uncertain as to the value of the question. It may originally have been intended
to seek information about the surrounding circumstances of the death. Instead, it tends to
provoke a one-word response, chosen from the terms listed in the question. If such a
response is inserted by a doctor who was not present at the death and is merely
239
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
speculating as to how the death occurred, it can provide no assistance at all. Different
doctors apply different terms to describe similar modes of death. If the question required
a brief description of how the death occurred, it would be of real value.
11.16 Question 11 asks the certifying doctor to state how far the answers to the last two (in the
Dukinfield crematorium version, the word ‘two’ is emphasised by underlining) questions
are the result of his/her own observations or are based on statements made by others. The
reference to ‘the last two questions’ is ambiguous. It could refer either to parts (a) and
(b) of question 10 (i.e. (a) the mode and (b) the duration of death) or it could apply to
questions 9 (cause of death) and 10 (mode and duration of death). Some crematoria have
tried to remove the ambiguity by including an explanatory note, or additional words, on
their forms. The Form B issued by Newcastle-upon-Tyne crematorium specifies that
question 11 refers to the answers given in question 10. The Form B issued by Stockport
crematorium contains a note which begins: ‘State how far the answers to the last two
questions 9 and 10 are the result ...’. The difference can be significant. One medical
referee who gave evidence to the Inquiry understood question 11 to refer to both
questions 9 and 10. (This was despite the fact that a marginal note on the Form B issued
by the crematorium at which he officiated stated that the Home Office had advised that
question 11 referred to question 10(a) and (b).) In response to question 9, the Form B
doctor states his/her views about the cause of death. Therefore, the medical referee took
the view that it was essential, if the Form B was to be accepted, that the doctor should
record in response to question 11 that s/he had made the relevant observation. That would
indicate that s/he was relying on his/her own observations in order to assess the cause of
death. If the certifying doctor inserted in response to question 11 the name of a relative of
the deceased, or a nurse or carer, the form would not, in his view, be acceptable. The
same witness acknowledged that, if question 11 referred only to the two parts of question
10 (relating to mode and duration of death), it would be perfectly permissible for the
certifying doctor to record only the names of those people who had observed the
deceased during the process of death. In summary, it is clear that there is no consistency
of approach to this question.
11.17 Question 12asks if the deceased underwent any operation during his/her final illness or
within the year before death and, if so, seeks information about the nature of the operation
and the identity of the person who performed it. The purpose behind this question is to
ascertain whether the deceased has undergone any surgical procedure that might have
caused or contributed to his/her death.
11.18 Question 13 asks for information about those who nursed the deceased during his/her last
illness. Some doctors take this to mean only professional nursing care; others understand
it to include care provided by relatives. One purpose of this question is to provide the Form
C doctor with the names of persons whom s/he may wish to question in connection with
the completion of Form C. However, no address, telephone number or other contact
details are sought. Question 14 was designed for the same purpose and asks who were
the persons (if any) present at the moment of death. Here also, there is no requirement to
give the contact details of such persons. Presence ‘at the moment of death’ might seem
unequivocally to suggest that the person(s) identified should have been in the presence
of the deceased when s/he drew his/her last breath. However, some doctors interpret the
240
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
phrase differently. Dr Ian Morgan, a general practitioner and crematorium medical
referee, told the Inquiry that he would regard a wife as having been present at the moment
of her husband’s death if she had left him alive at night, gone to sleep in the next door room
and found him dead the next morning.
11.19 In questions 15, 16 and 17, the certifying doctor is asked whether s/he feels any doubt
whatever as to the character of the disease or the cause of death, or has any reason to
suspect that the death was due, directly or indirectly, to violence, poison, privation or
neglect. The doctor is also asked whether s/he has any reason whatever to suppose a
further examination of the body to be desirable. As on Form A, those questions are
invariably answered in the negative. If the certifying doctor had any concerns, the death
would no doubt have been reported to the coroner. At the Dukinfield crematorium, a note
has been added opposite question 16. The note reads, ‘Death due directly or indirectly
to alcohol has now to be reported to the Coroner’. This is a ‘local rule’, presumably
indicating that the Coroner classifies such deaths as ‘unnatural’.
11.20 Question 18 asks if the Form B doctor has also issued the MCCD and, if not, who has. In
most cases, this question will be answered in the affirmative. However, one might have a
situation where the attending doctor is away at the time of death, a colleague is qualified
to issue the MCCD and the attending doctor arrives back in time to complete the Form B;
this would be perfectly permissible. There are other circumstances when such a situation
might legitimately arise.
11.21 The Form B issued by the Dukinfield crematorium has an additional question, question 19,
which is not on the form prescribed by the Regulations. This asks if the coroner has been
notified of the death and, if s/he has, requests full details. Some of the forms issued by
other crematoria contain an instruction to the certifying doctor to provide this information
but do not ask a specific question. An example will serve to illustrate the purpose of the
question. If a deceased person has undergone a recent operation, that fact may raise a
question as to whether the operation played any part in the death. The attending doctor
will contact the coroner’s office and may be given ‘permission’ to certify the death. He or
she should then record the fact of his/her contact with the coroner’s office and the outcome
in response to question 19 of Form B. The effect of that will usually be that the medical
referee will not investigate further the possibility that the operation had a bearing on the
death. Were it not for the information given in response to question 19, s/he might feel
constrained to do so. A belief that the coroner (in fact, in most cases, the coroner’s officer)
has been informed will usually be sufficient to satisfy the medical referee, who will accept
the doctor’s word.
11.22 At the conclusion of Form B, the doctor is required to certify:
‘... that the answers given above are true and accurate to the best of my
knowledge and belief, and that I know of no reasonable cause to suspect
that the deceased died either a violent or an unnatural death or a sudden
death of which the cause is unknown or died in such place or
circumstances as to require an inquest in pursuance of any Act’.
11.23 The versions of Forms B, C and F produced by certain crematoria (of which Dukinfield is
one) state that the forms are regarded as strictly confidential, the right to inspect them
241
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
being confined to ‘the Secretary of State, the Ministry [sic] of Health and the Chief
Officer of a Police Force’. This reference to confidentiality does not appear on the forms
issued by all crematoria. However, the forms are generally treated as confidential. Form
B is never shown to the deceased’s relatives, who thus have no opportunity of confirming
the accuracy or otherwise of the details contained in it. Many relatives of Shipman’s former
patients saw the cremation forms (apart from Form A) for the first time when they were
shown them by a member of the Inquiry legal team.
11.24 It is not unusual for Form B to be delivered to the crematorium with some questions
unanswered. In areas where the cremation forms contain a warning about confidentiality,
many funeral directors take the view that they are precluded from checking the forms
before delivery to ensure that they are complete. Consequently, it is left to staff at the
crematorium – sometimes the medical referee – to chase up missing information. As with
MCCDs, Forms B are frequently completed by inexperienced junior hospital doctors and
this can give rise to particular problems with defective forms. However, evidence
received by the Inquiry suggests that most doctors complete the forms carefully and
accurately.
11.25 Although a completed Form B provides much more information than a completed MCCD,
it is still of limited usefulness for the purpose of the investigation of the cause and
circumstances of the death by another doctor or by the medical referee. It would also be
of limited usefulness if seen by the coroner (which it is not). It does not require what I
regard as the two essentials for the investigation of any death, namely a brief medical
history and an account of the circumstances of the death.
The Confirmatory Medical Certificate: Form C
The Choice of Doctor to Complete Form C
11.26 Despite conflicting views about its value, completion of the Confirmatory Medical
Certificate (Form C) remains a requirement for all cremations where the coroner has not
issued Form E following a post-mortem examination and/or the opening of an inquest. The
doctor completing Form C receives a fee set at the same level (currently £45.50) as for
Form B.
11.27 In order to be able to give a Form C, the certifying doctor must have been registered in this
country for not less than five years. There has been ongoing controversy over the precise
meaning of this requirement. The Regulations drafted in 1989 would have included within
the five-year period any period of provisional or limited registration, provided that full
registration had been achieved at the time the Form C was completed.
11.28 The Form C doctor must also be independent, to the extent that s/he must not be a relative
of the deceased or a relative or partner of the Form B doctor. The word ‘partner’ is
inappropriate to the completion of Form C in a hospital setting. Indeed, it may be
inappropriate in some general practices, where no partnership exists. In the early 1980s,
an official from the Home Office wrote to medical referees, explaining the Department’s
view that the Form C doctor should be ‘demonstrably independent’ of the Form B doctor.
The Home Secretary was said to take the view that, in the case of a death occurring in
242
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
hospital, the Form C doctor should not have been in charge of the patient or directly
concerned in his/her treatment. The letter indicated that the ‘spirit of the Regulations’
would usually prohibit two doctors from the same firm (i.e. the hospital team responsible
for the care of the patient) from completing Forms B and C in the same case. The Forms
C issued by some crematoria contain notes at the head of the form, reflecting this view.
No such note appears on the version of the Form C issued by the Dukinfield crematorium.
11.29 In practice, following a death in hospital, Form C is frequently completed by a pathologist,
even where there has been no autopsy. Examination of the Dukinfield cremation register
revealed that the same doctors employed at the Tameside General Hospital appeared
time and time again as signatories of Forms C for deaths at the hospital. It appears that
many hospitals have a small pool of doctors who complete Forms C on a rota system. The
fees consequent upon membership of the pool can, it would appear, be quite significant.
The Form C doctor must state the office (on the Dukinfield crematorium form, the word
‘appointment’ is used) that s/he holds.
11.30 When a death occurs in the community, it is usually the attending (Form B) doctor who
chooses which of his/her colleagues should complete the Form C. Occasionally, the
choice will lie with the funeral director. This might happen if the body is lying at a funeral
director’s premises some distance from the attending doctor’s surgery and from his/her
local colleagues. In those circumstances, it may be more convenient for the funeral
director to select a Form C doctor who practises nearby and can attend to view the body
without inconvenience.
11.31 Where the Form B doctor is responsible for the choice, it is often one of convenience. It is
often the case that two doctors, or two general practices, operate a reciprocal
arrangement whereby each signs the other’s Forms C. Sometimes, the arrangement is
more complex. Shipman, for example, used members of the Brooke Practice to sign
virtually all his Forms C, save where it would have been geographically inconvenient for
them to do so. Three members of the Brooke Practice reciprocated by asking Shipman to
sign their Forms C; the other two members went elsewhere. The relationship between the
Form B and Form C doctors is often a close one, sometimes social as well as professional.
Such a relationship does not encourage the Form C doctor to approach the task of
assessing the evidence about cause of death with a critical eye. Instead, s/he is likely to
embark upon his/her assessment with a degree of confidence that all will be well. Indeed,
even if s/he were tempted to probe (e.g. by inspecting the medical records), s/he is likely
to be discouraged from doing so for fear of appearing to question the judgement (or even
the honesty) of a friend and/or colleague. Furthermore, the doctor who undertakes a
minute examination of the medical history before completing Form C may well find that, in
the future, the task of completing Form C goes to one of his/her less conscientious
colleagues.
11.32Evidence heard by the Inquiry suggests that, although doctors are aware of and comply
with the requirement that the Form C doctor should be independent of the Form B doctor,
most doctors have not thought about the reasons for it and have not appreciated the need
for true independence of mind. It appears that the requirement for independence is
regarded by most as a technical matter.
243
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
11.33 As I have already explained in Chapter Three, the original concept of the Form C doctor
was of a practitioner holding a prestigious public appointment that would have set
him/her apart from the doctor who had completed Form B. Such a practitioner would – or
should – have had the necessary detachment, authority and confidence to express
disagreement with the Form B doctor, had s/he thought it right to do so. The position of
such a practitioner would have been very different from that of a doctor in the community
performing the same function today.
The Personal Inquiry
11.34 Before completing Form C, the doctor should examine Form B and make a ‘personal
inquiry’ into the death. The nature of that ‘personal inquiry’ is identified in the series of
questions posed in Form C. I have already set out (at paragraph 3.25) the eight questions
that appear in Form C, as prescribed in the 1930 Regulations. I shall now consider these
questions, and the way in which doctors answer them, in greater detail.
Questions 1–4
11.35 The first question asks whether the doctor completing Form C has seen the body of the
deceased. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that, in the community setting,
the Form C doctor always attends at the premises of the funeral director to view the body
and complete Form C. Payment of the fee for completing the form is often made at the time
of this visit.
11.36 The second question asks whether the Form C doctor has ‘carefully examined the body
externally’. Although that question is invariably answered in the affirmative, it is evident
that the nature and extent of the examination undertaken varies widely. Often, conditions
at the funeral director’s premises are not conducive to a full and careful examination. At
one of the Inquiry’s seminars, Dr John Grenville, a general practitioner, gave a graphic
account of the conditions that had prevailed at the premises of a busy funeral director
when he had attended there the previous day. Those conditions would have made a
thorough examination of the naked body difficult, if not impossible. Sometimes, the body
to be examined is already dressed and in a coffin and there is a reluctance on the part of
the funeral director to remove and strip it. According to the funeral directors who provided
evidence to the Inquiry, the extent of the examination varies from doctor to doctor. Some
carry out a thorough examination of the front and back of the body. At the other extreme,
some confine their examination merely to checking the identifying tag or bracelet and
viewing the face. The rest fall somewhere in between. The variations in practice described
by the funeral directors were confirmed by the evidence of doctors accustomed to
completing Forms C.
11.37 Even if carried out conscientiously, a physical examination will not, in the majority of cases,
assist in diagnosing the cause of death. Signs of emaciation may tend to confirm a
diagnosis of death caused by terminal cancer. Yellowing of the skin may indicate liver
disease. Surgical scars may confirm a history of recent illness requiring operative
treatment. But an examination will not shed any light on whether a person died of a
coronary thrombosis, a cerebrovascular accident or as a result of any one of a number of
244
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
other natural causes. It would not have led to a correct diagnosis of the cause of death of
one of Shipman’s victims. It may well be that it is because they realise that an examination
is unlikely to yield any useful information that many doctors regard it as a mere formality
which can safely be dispensed with.
11.38 A thorough physical examination, made in appropriate conditions, could be expected to
reveal signs of violence such as wounds, bruising and (possibly) petechiae (the tiny
haemorrhages which are often observed after a death from suffocation or strangulation)
or signs of possible neglect, such as pressure sores and malnutrition. There is no way of
knowing how frequently such signs have gone unnoticed in the past because no proper
physical examination has taken place. However, the examination by the Form C doctor is
not the only opportunity to observe signs of violence or neglect. In many (if not most)
cases, the funeral director will see the body unclothed in the course of preparation for
burial or cremation. He or she is in a good position to notice any abnormal signs and the
Inquiry was told that it is not unusual for a funeral director to refer a death to the coroner
if abnormal signs are observed. Some of the doctors who gave evidence suggested that
a representative of the funeral director would usually be present when they attended to
view the body and they would expect that person to mention any unusual signs that had
been noticed.
11.39 The third question on Form C asks whether the certifying doctor has made a post-mortem
examination. Unless the doctor is a pathologist who has undertaken a hospital postmortem,
this will rarely be answered in the affirmative. The Inquiry is aware of one general
practitioner in Hyde who regularly gave an affirmative answer to this question, on the basis
that an external examination made after death was, strictly speaking, ‘a post-mortem
examination’. He was, however, the exception. Where a hospital post-mortem has been
carried out and the result is known to the Form B doctor, this should of course be indicated
in response to question 8A of Form B and no Form C is then necessary. Fewer hospital
post-mortems have been carried out in recent years and they are, in any event, rare where
a patient dies in the community.
11.40 Question 4 of Form C asks whether the certifying doctor has seen and questioned the
Form B doctor. For practical reasons, such conversations frequently take place on the
telephone and doctors answer the question in the affirmative even when they have not met
the Form B doctor face to face. Forms B and C are delivered to, or collected by, the Form
C doctor, who takes them (in fact, they are often joined in a single document in booklet
form) to the funeral director’s premises. Alternatively, the forms may be left with the funeral
director for the Form C doctor to view when s/he attends.
11.41 The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that some discussion between the
certifying doctors invariably takes place. Most Form B doctors know the type of
explanation of the clinical history which is expected of them and provide the necessary
information.
11.42It is clear from the evidence available to the Inquiry that it is not usual practice for a doctor
completing Form C to inspect the deceased’s medical records before giving the
certificate. Dr Ian Morgan, Medical Referee at the Robin Hood crematorium, Solihull, told
the Inquiry that to request to see another practitioner’s medical records in a general
245
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
practice setting would imply a degree of suspicion. It would not be seen as a neutral
enquiry. He contrasted that with the position at the hospice where he is Medical Director.
There, the records are left out, as a matter of course, for the Form C doctor to examine. In
my view, this is good practice.
11.43 There is no statutory requirement that any of the questions contained in Form C must be
answered in the affirmative if a cremation is to be authorised. The Regulations drafted in
1989 would have introduced such a provision in relation to questions 1, 2and 4; those
Regulations never became law. However, as I have already said, the version of Form C
issued by every crematorium in the country (so far as the Inquiry is aware) contains a note
to that effect.
11.44 Affirmative answers to questions 1, 2and 4 usually indicate that the doctor has seen the
deceased’s body and examined it to a greater or lesser extent. That examination may have
provided confirmatory evidence of the diagnosis of cause of death (e.g. in the terminal
cancer case). More likely, the examination will have been too superficial to reveal anything
of significance, or the cause of death will be one that would not give rise to evidence, even
on a thorough physical examination. Thus, the examination will have provided no
independent evidence upon which the Form C doctor can rely. The Form C doctor will also
have heard the account of the clinical history and the reasons for the diagnosis of cause
of death, as propounded by the Form B doctor. That account will not have been confirmed
by inspection of the medical records.
11.45 The pathologist who has given an affirmative answer to question 3 will, of course, be in a
completely different position. He or she will have undertaken an autopsy and will have had
the opportunity of comparing the findings of that examination with the clinical history given
by the Form B doctor.
Questions 5–8
11.46 Questions 5–8 of Form C ask whether the certifying doctor has seen and questioned:
- any other medical practitioner who attended the deceased
- any person who nursed the deceased during his/her last illness
- any person who was present at the death
- any of the deceased’s relatives
- any other person.
The doctor is also asked to give names and addresses and is asked whether s/he has
seen the person(s) alone.
11.47 The obtaining of evidence from a source separate and independent from the Form B
doctor was an important element of the system described in the 1903 Departmental
Committee Report. It constituted the only effective check on the Form B doctor. It seems,
however, that the significance of this evidence, and therefore the importance of questions
5–8, was rapidly forgotten, certainly after the relaxation of the rules (as a result of the 1930
Regulations) governing those qualified to complete Form C. Even in 1935 (see
246
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
paragraphs 3.24 to 3.29), it was reported that some Form C doctors invariably failed to
question anyone except the Form B doctor; indeed, it was claimed that some did not even
do that. The Home Secretary’s letter of that year, which emphasised the need for
affirmative answers to questions 1, 2and 4, made no mention of questions 5–8.
11.48 From time to time over subsequent years, as I have explained in Chapter Three, various
individuals and organisations drew attention to the fact that the investigations referred to
in questions 5–8 afforded the Form C doctor an important opportunity to obtain evidence
from an independent source and therefore provided an essential safeguard. In 1960,
Dr John Havard, then Assistant Secretary of the BMA, claimed on behalf of the Association
that potential criminals were deterred by the knowledge that an independent doctor
questioned relatives, nurses and other persons in every case. In reality, even at the time
Dr Havard made that claim, it is evident that many members of the BMA were carrying out
no such questioning.
11.49 Despite these references, attention was more generally directed at the reported failure of
doctors to carry out even the investigations required in order to answer questions 1, 2and
4 affirmatively and at ways (e.g. by means of the draft Regulations circulated in 1962) in
which they might be compelled to carry out their duties (i.e. to see and carefully examine
the body and to question the Form B doctor) properly.
11.50 The Brodrick Committee, which reported in 1971, also recognised the potential
importance of the questioning of persons other than the Form B doctor. The Committee
found that many Form C doctors were not taking the opportunity to carry out their own
investigations. This fact, coupled with evidence that the physical examination carried out
was frequently inadequate or non-existent, led the Committee to the conclusion that Form
C was valueless and should be abolished as soon as possible. The Committee does not
appear to have considered the imposition of a requirement that independent
investigations should be made in every case. It may be that members of the Committee did
not believe that, even with such a requirement, effective investigations would be made. In
any event, their view must have been coloured by the fact that they did not accept that
there was a real risk of cremation being used to conceal evidence of homicide.
11.51 In July 2002, the Inquiry received a letter from Dr Derek North, a general practitioner from
Gosport, Hampshire. He enclosed a copy of the Form C used at the Portchester
crematorium, which serves his local area. He pointed out the note on that form which reads
as follows:
‘The Medical Referee requires that at least one of the questions No. 5–8
should be answered in the affirmative.’
11.52Dr North had visited the Inquiry website and noticed that the cremation forms from the
Dukinfield crematorium that appeared there did not bear a similar note. In his letter, he
commented as follows:
‘This simple requirement on the crem[ation] form I am sure would have
made it much harder for Harold Shipman to commit his murders. I and
my partners have never signed a form C without having answered at
least one of those questions in the affirmative. I have been a GP for 20
247
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
years and I have always ensured that I could answer one of the questions
in the affirmative. I was quite amazed to see that as recently as 1997 that
[sic] Doctors filling in form C were answering No to all of those
questions’.
11.53 The Inquiry had previously been aware that some of the doctors practising in Todmorden
in the 1970s had, before completing Form C, questioned relatives of the deceased in most
cases. This had become evident when examining the cremation forms completed by
Shipman during his time at Todmorden. Cremation forms dating from his time in Hyde
revealed very few instances of a Form C doctor questioning anyone other than Shipman.
The Inquiry team assumed that the practice of questioning persons other than the Form B
doctor had lapsed with time.
11.54 Once Dr North’s communication had been received, further enquiries were made. They
revealed a number of other crematoria with a similar requirement to that imposed by the
Portchester crematorium. Enquiries of those crematoria have shown that, in some cases,
a marginal note setting out the requirement has appeared on their Forms C for as long as
anyone can remember. However, the Halton Medical Referee, Dr David Robertson, was
responsible for its introduction at the Warrington crematorium, and (with a colleague) at
the Widnes crematorium, in the 1990s. He gave his reasons for the change as:
‘... dissatisfaction on my part with the standard of information being
provided and the level to which many forms failed in my view to
accurately confirm the facts on Form B. There was no third party
corroboration and the only dialogue reported was that between the two
doctors. Potentially scope was present for abuse and collusion.’
11.55 The Darlington Medical Referee, Dr Louis Rosin, introduced a similar requirement in about
1970, for similar reasons. Conversely, the Medical Referee at the Carlisle crematorium,
Dr Peter Tiplady, removed the requirement recently, after objections from doctors from
neighbouring areas who were not accustomed to it.
11.56 Enquiries have been made of those employed at the crematoria concerned, as well as of
the Home Office and the Cremation Society of Great Britain, in order to discover whether
any advice or guidance was issued which may have prompted the decision by some
crematoria to impose the requirement of an affirmative answer to one of questions 5–8. No
evidence of any such advice or guidance has been found although the similarity of the
wording on the forms issued by different crematoria strongly suggests a common source.
It seems that officials currently employed in the relevant section of the Home Office were
unaware that any crematoria imposed this requirement until informed by the Inquiry.
11.57 Investigations by the Inquiry suggest that, where a local requirement to answer one of
questions 5–8 in the alternative is imposed, it is complied with in all but a few cases; those
few cases may well relate to deaths occurring in neighbouring areas where no such
requirement exists. Often, a medical referee will not enforce the requirement where a
doctor has completed a Form C issued by a different crematorium in good faith. Such a
doctor may not realise that there is a local requirement at the crematorium where the
cremation is to take place. Where no local requirement is in force, questions 5–8 are
248
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
answered in the negative in most cases. Crematoria in one area have had a requirement
since about 1996 that one of the questions 6–8 should wherever possible ‘contain details
of an enquiry sufficient to help satisfy the Medical Referee that sufficient enquiry has
been made’. The Medical Referee has told the Inquiry that general practitioners usually
provide satisfactory information, but hospital doctors invariably fail to comply.
11.58 Where the crematorium requires the Form C doctor to question someone other than the
Form B doctor, a significant proportion of Form C doctors question relatives, as opposed
to the other categories of person named on the form. This is no doubt because, if a
deceased person has not been in hospital and has not received nursing care from
persons other than family, there will be no one else available with knowledge of the death.
If the death occurs in a nursing home or similar setting, questions may be asked of the
staff.
11.59 The Inquiry obtained evidence from a number of doctors who practise in areas where the
local crematorium requires an affirmative answer to one of questions 5–8. They were
asked about their experience of speaking to relatives. It had previously been suggested
to the Inquiry that it was impracticable to question relatives because it would cause undue
distress. In general, the experience of the doctors who provided evidence was that, so
long as relatives are informed in advance that another doctor would be contacting them,
and so long as they fully understand the purpose of the contact, they are happy to assist.
In practice, the Form B doctor usually informs relatives that another doctor will be in touch
with them. The doctors did not report any difficulty with speaking to relatives, nor any signs
of hostility, resentment or distress at the approach. Many of them saw the contact as
offering a valuable opportunity for relatives to voice any concerns or doubts that they
might have about the death.
11.60 In Scotland, the Form C prescribed by the Cremation (Scotland) Regulations 1935
requires the form to be completed by a doctor who has seen and examined the
deceased’s body and spoken to the Form B doctor. In other words, the equivalent of an
affirmative answer to questions 1, 2and 4 of the Form C prescribed for England and Wales
is a prerequisite to completing the Scottish form. The questions which the Form C doctor
has to answer relate only to whether s/he has performed a post-mortem examination
(question 1) and whether s/he has questioned a third person, other than the Form B doctor
(questions 2–5). There is no statutory requirement that any of the questions on the form
should be answered in the affirmative. However, marginal notes indicating a requirement
for one (sometimes two) affirmative answer(s) appear on the Forms C used by many
Scottish crematoria. The importance of the requirement for at least one of the questions to
be answered in the affirmative was emphasised in a letter sent by the Scottish Office Home
and Health Department to all medical referees and deputy medical referees in Scotland
in September 1995.
11.61 The Dukinfield crematorium imposes no local requirement for affirmative answers to any
of questions 5–8 and it is the local practice for questions 1, 2and 4 only to be answered
in the affirmative. It is clear from the Inquiry’s investigations that the practice at Dukinfield
is typical of that prevailing in the majority of crematoria throughout England and Wales.
249
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Prevalent Attitudes to Form C
11.62Evidence heard by the Inquiry suggests that many doctors regard the completion of
Form C as a technical requirement only. Just as they have never thought about why it
is necessary for the Form C doctor to be independent of the Form B doctor, they have
never thought about what Form C is designed to achieve. They do not see themselves
as carrying out an independent investigation of the cause and circumstances of the
death. A common perception, among doctors who I am sure are in other respects
entirely conscientious, is that they must listen to the history and decide whether the Form
B doctor’s conclusion as to the cause of death is a reasonable one. If they know the
doctor to be inexperienced, they might approach the task with some expectation that
s/he might be wrong. However, if they know the doctor and believe him/her to be
competent, the strong expectation will be that the Form B doctor will be right. The
doctors who gave oral evidence to the Inquiry admitted, when pressed about the matter,
that they had never previously thought that they were in any way ‘policing’ their
colleagues. Most had never thought that they were supposed to consider whether their
colleagues might have concealed wrongdoing of any kind, whether deliberate or
through lack of care. This lack of understanding of the purpose of Form C and the
doctors’ function in completing it is not altogether surprising since it appears that
doctors do not receive any formal education or guidance about the purpose or
completion of Form C. However, it is disappointing that they do not have a greater
understanding. The BMA has been stressing the importance of Form C in
representations made on behalf of its members to Government Departments and
independent committees of enquiry for over 50 years.
11.63 The Inquiry heard evidence about the degree of care and attention that Form C doctors
apply to their task. It appears that it is quite common for the Form C doctor to rely almost
completely on the oral account given by the Form B doctor and not to scrutinise what
has been written on Form B in any detail. This seems to come about in part because,
quite often, the Form C doctor does not see either Form B or Form C until s/he reaches
the premises of the funeral director where s/he is to view the body. By that time, s/he
will have heard the oral account and will have made up his/her mind that the death was
natural and that the cause of death was as explained by the Form B doctor. What the
doctor has put on Form B does not, by then, appear important. When Shipman’s forms
were examined, it was found that the Form C doctor had often failed to notice that Form
B contained internal inconsistencies that would have been obvious on careful
examination.
11.64 It appeared from the evidence that many, although not all, Form C doctors regard the
physical examination of the body as a mere formality, no more than a hoop to be jumped
through before signing the form. As I have explained, this attitude is to some extent
understandable, as examination of the body is unlikely to provide much information
relevant to the cause of death. However, it might provide evidence of injury, ill treatment
or lack of care. Once again, it is disappointing that doctors appear to have so little
understanding of what they should be looking for or why, particularly given that their
representative body has in the past laid such stress on the importance of the Form C
procedure.
250
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Attitudes to Questions 5–8
11.65 As I have said, some crematoria require that one of questions 5–8 should be answered in
the affirmative. Where this is so, the Form C doctor must question someone with
knowledge of the death who is independent of the Form B doctor. In areas where the
provision of an affirmative answer to one of questions 5–8 is not compulsory, it is unusual
(although not unheard of) for a Form C doctor to make any enquiry of a person
independent of the Form B doctor. Some doctors say that they would question a relative
or carer if they had any doubts about the cause of death but that this rarely, if ever, occurs.
Others say that they never do it, as questioning would be intrusive and would cause
additional distress to relatives. However, the evidence of those who practise in areas
where such enquiries are made suggests, as I have already said, that relatives do not find
such questions intrusive or distressing. Of course, much will depend on the sensitivity of
the questioner. However, it appears that, if the bereaved family knows that a doctor will
contact them to ask questions about the death and that this is normal procedure, no
offence is caused.
Could Questions 5–8 Provide a Useful Safeguard?
11.66 As I have said, the Dukinfield crematorium was not one of those where a positive answer
was required to one of questions 5–8. In the vast majority of cases, the doctors who
completed Forms C for Shipman did not question anybody independent of Shipman. They
trusted him as a respected colleague. He lied to them; they believed his account of the
death and they confirmed his dishonest opinion of the cause of death. The Form C
procedure, as operated, served no useful purpose as a deterrent or as a means of
detecting Shipman’s activities. The question is whether it would have been useful in either
respect if there had been a requirement that one of questions 5–8 should be answered in
the affirmative.
11.67 During Phase One of the Inquiry, it became apparent that Shipman frequently explained
a death to the deceased’s family in one way and described the circumstances on Form B
in quite a different way. He would often pretend that the death was expected by the family,
who had been in attendance. On Form B, he would name or describe a particular person,
a relative, carer or warden, who, he said, had been present at the death. If the Form C
doctor had been obliged to ask questions of a person independent of Shipman, it is highly
likely that s/he would have spoken to that person. In many cases, there would have been
a real prospect that the Form C doctor would have discovered that Shipman had not told
the truth about a purely factual matter.
11.68 By way of example, in the case of Miss Maureen Ward, whom Shipman was convicted of
killing and who lived in sheltered accommodation, Shipman claimed that the warden was
present at the death. Had the warden been asked, she would have told the Form C doctor
that she most certainly was not present at the death and that Shipman had come to find
her to tell her that he had found Miss Ward dead in her flat. She would also have added
that she was most surprised about the death because she had seen Miss Ward earlier that
day, out and about and apparently quite well. This would have been quite inconsistent with
Shipman’s claim that Miss Ward had died as the result of carcinomatosis resulting from a
secondary tumour in the brain.
251
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
11.69 In the case of Mrs Joyce Woodhead, whom I found that Shipman killed, Shipman stated
on Form B that Mrs Woodhead had died as the result of a coronary thrombosis and that
her sister had been present at the moment of death. In fact, her sister, Mrs Freda Hibbs,
was not present and, had the Form C doctor questioned her, she would have said so and
would have added that she had been very surprised to find her sister dead in bed. She
might also have added that her sister looked very peaceful. If questioned, she would have
said that, so far as she knew, her sister had no previous history of heart disease. The Form
C doctor should then have realised that Shipman had not only told a lie on Form B, but also
appeared to have certified the cause of death on inadequate grounds.
11.70 Another example is the case of Mrs Eileen Crompton. Shipman killed her by giving her a
lethal injection in the presence of Mrs Patricia Heyl, the Deputy Manager of Charnley
House, a residential home for the elderly. Shipman stated on Form B that ‘the Matron’ was
present at the death. Had the Form C doctor spoken to Mrs Heyl, she might have learned
the surprising information that, before administering the injection, Shipman had said that
he was giving a ‘kill or cure’ injection. That information should have puzzled and alarmed
the Form C doctor.
11.71 Quite apart from the cases in which Shipman told demonstrable lies on Form B, there are
a very great number of cases in which a relative, when questioned sympathetically
by a Form C doctor, would have confided that s/he was extremely surprised by the
suddenness of the death. I think it likely that many would have given an
account of the deceased’s previous state of health which would have caused the Form C
doctor to question Shipman’s ability to certify the death. I do not suggest that all the
relatives would have expressed their concerns; some were so completely taken in by
Shipman’s explanation for the death that they would have done no more than repeat it to
the Form C doctor. However, I believe there were many who would have confided their
surprise and concern if questioned directly. There is a world of difference between
giving a relative a direct opportunity to express a concern and merely leaving it to the
relative to contact the coroner or the police. Most people would not approach the
coroner or the police unless they had strong suspicions or concerns based on specific
factors. On the other hand, if given the opportunity, a relative might well express
surprise or puzzlement about a death, even in the absence of actual suspicion of
wrongdoing.
11.72I do not suggest that, merely because a Form C doctor discovered that some aspect
of Shipman’s account was factually inaccurate, or heard an expression of concern from
a relative, s/he would immediately suspect wrongdoing. However, if conscientious,
s/he could not merely complete Form C. He or she would at least have to speak to
Shipman again and ask further questions. He or she might well feel it necessary to refuse
to sign Form C and to advise Shipman to report the death to the coroner. If a Form C
doctor had had to query cases with Shipman on a regular basis, this should have
attracted notice. What would have happened if a Form C doctor had refused to sign
the certificate is not clear. Shipman would not have wished to approach another doctor
to sign Form C as, when s/he consulted the family member or carer, s/he would be likely
to hear the same information as the first Form C doctor, together with the fact that
another doctor had been asking questions. Shipman might have promised to speak to
252
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the coroner and have returned with the claim (which might or might not have been true)
that the coroner had approved the cause of death. He might have had to report the
death to the coroner and risk the possibility that an autopsy might not provide a plausible
cause of death and that toxicology would follow.
11.73 I cannot say precisely how the Form C doctors would have responded to the discovery
that Shipman’s Forms B contained serious inaccuracies or that he appeared willing to
certify deaths in a number of cases where relatives and carers were concerned,
surprised or puzzled. However, I do think that it would have been much more difficult
for Shipman to deceive. I think it likely that he would have appreciated the difficulties
he would face if he told lies on Form B or gave a different account to the relatives from
that given to the Form C doctor. I think he would have recognised the risk he would run
that either the Form C doctor or a relative or carer might realise that he had lied and
that he had been present alone with the deceased at the moment of death. I think this
recognition would have acted as a real deterrent. As I explained in my First Report,
Shipman was able to control his urge to kill when he perceived himself to be at risk of
discovery. If there had been a requirement at Dukinfield crematorium that the Form C
doctor should answer at least one of questions 5–8 in the affirmative, I think it likely that
Shipman would have killed fewer patients.
11.74 Further, if Shipman had taken the risk of killing despite the knowledge that the Form C
doctor would be likely to question relatives and carers, I believe that the chances of his
being detected would have been increased. I cannot say that, on the first occasion on
which a doctor declined to complete a Form C for Shipman, the death would have been
reported to the coroner, an autopsy and toxicology would have followed and that
morphine would have been found and he would have been discovered. But, if he had
taken the risk often enough, the chances of detection would have been greatly
increased. Quite apart from the actual process of a report to the coroner, autopsy and
toxicology, the Form C doctors should have noticed that relatives often had concerns
about a death involving Shipman. I cannot say that they would have done but, if they had
heard a similar story, often repeated, their suspicions might well have been aroused. The
kind of report that Dr Linda Reynolds made to the Coroner in March 1998 might have
been made earlier and with much greater attendant detail. I cannot say when this
would have happened but I think it likely that questioning relatives and carers would
have led to Shipman’s detection at some stage, whereas the system as operated
never did.
The Authority to Cremate: Form F
The Medical Referee
11.75 Authority to cremate a body is given by a medical referee or (in his/her absence or if s/he
has been the deceased’s medical attendant) a deputy medical referee. The post of
medical referee is a part-time one. The medical referee (or deputy) attends the
crematorium office for a short time on weekdays as necessary. If s/he is still in other
employment, s/he will fit in his/her visits to the office with the demands of his/her
employment. If the medical referee is retired, s/he will attend the office when and for as
253
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
long as is necessary. A medical referee is remunerated for each cremation authorised.
The current recommended rate is £5.50 per cremation. Rates at privately owned
crematoria may be higher. There are currently about 550 medical referees and deputy
medical referees, covering over 240 crematoria.
The Appointment of Medical Referees
11.76 Medical referees and deputy medical referees must be registered medical practitioners
of not less than five years’ standing and, in the words of Regulation 10 of the 1930
Regulations:
‘... must possess such experience and qualifications as will fit them for
the duties required of them ...’.
11.77 If appropriately qualified, a medical referee or deputy medical referee may also be a
coroner. The Inquiry is not aware of any medical referee who currently holds both
positions. The 1930 Regulations also provide that the medical referee or deputy medical
referee may be a medical officer of health. It is a common arrangement for a director of
public health to act as medical referee to a local crematorium. In some areas, the posts of
medical referee and deputy medical referee, when vacant, have traditionally been filled
by doctors from the public health department at the local health authority. In other areas,
medical referees and their deputies have always been appointed from among doctors
working in general practice.
11.78 Provided that s/he fulfils the other qualifications, a medical referee or deputy medical
referee can complete Forms C and F in respect of the same death. The Inquiry was told by
Dr Morgan that this happens at the crematorium where he officiates. The 1930 Regulations
specifically provide for this eventuality. As I explained in Chapter Three, at the time when
the rules for cremation were first devised, an arrangement whereby the medical referee
carried out a personal investigation into a death was considered ideal, although not
possible to achieve in every case. It was because of the practical difficulties (in particular,
difficulties of geography) that it was decided to place responsibility for personal
investigation on the Form C doctor, rather than the medical referee.
11.79 The Regulations provide that:
‘The Secretary of State [i.e. the Home Secretary] shall appoint as Medical
Referee and Deputy Medical Referee such fit persons as may be
nominated by the Cremation Authority.’
11.80 The system is that, when a vacancy occurs, the cremation authority notifies the Home
Office of the name of the doctor who the authority proposes should fill that vacancy.
Sometimes, a curriculum vitae accompanies the notification. The Home Office checks that
the doctor fulfils the registration requirement but makes no further check on the suitability
of the proposed appointee. In effect, the part played by the Home Office in the
appointment process is merely a ‘rubber-stamping’ exercise. At paragraph 3.22, I
explained how the Home Office had become concerned, prior to 1930, at the manner in
which the cremation authorities were exercising their power to appoint. It was because of
that concern that the power to appoint was transferred to the Home Office by the 1930
254
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Regulations. It is not clear to what extent, if at all, the Home Office ever sought to use that
power in order to regulate the quality of appointees to the post of medical referee.
11.81 The failure by the Home Office to carry out any enquiry into applicants’ suitability for the
role of medical referee has been the subject of complaint and comment from time to time
over the years. The Home Office has openly admitted that it has no machinery to ‘vet’
nominations for the post. The stance of Departmental officials has been that the
Department is not in a position to make meaningful enquiries into the qualifications and
experience of medical practitioners. Instead, the Home Office has relied on the cremation
authorities to carry out all necessary checks.
11.82The draft Regulations circulated in 1962(which, as I have explained, were largely
overtaken by the work of the Brodrick Committee and were, therefore, not implemented in
their original form) would have removed from the Home Office the responsibility for
appointing medical referees. This responsibility would then have passed entirely to the
cremation authorities, thus bringing England and Wales into line with the position in
Scotland. The BMA opposed the proposed change strongly, questioning the extent to
which cremation authorities (in particular private authorities) could be relied upon to make
appropriate appointments and emphasising the importance of the role of the medical
referee. The BMA argued that the effect of placing the power of appointment entirely in the
hands of the cremation authority would be to compromise the independence of medical
referees. The BMA urged the Home Office to retain the power of appointment itself and to
introduce proper machinery for selection. The 1965 Regulations, when implemented, did
not introduce any change to the system of appointment, which has remained the same
ever since. The Brodrick Committee recognised the reality of the Home Office’s role in the
appointment process and observed that ‘... the approval of the Home Secretary
amounts to little more than a ‘‘rubber stamp’’’.
11.83 In 1997, an ‘efficiency scrutiny’ of government procedures was undertaken, in order to
examine the statutory arrangements whereby certain local authority powers were subject
to approval by central government. At the conclusion of that process, it was
recommended that the power of the Home Office to appoint medical referees should be
removed. This was because it was recognised that, in reality, the Home Office exercised
no independent judgement in relation to such appointments. The Home Office declined
to comply with the recommendation, relying on the point previously made by the BMA,
namely that the lack of accountability of private cremation authorities made it
inappropriate for the power of appointment to be entirely vested in them. There was,
however, no change in the way appointments to the post of medical referee were made.
11.84 The Inquiry has not undertaken any detailed survey of cremation authorities, in order to
discover whether any authorities appoint medical referees by means of open competition
and/or after a detailed enquiry into the experience and suitability of the various candidates
for the post. It may be that there are some authorities that do have proper selection
procedures. However, the evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that, at most
crematoria, the post of deputy medical referee is virtually in the gift of the existing medical
referee. He or she usually seeks candidates for the post from the health authority by which
s/he is, or was formerly, employed or from the general practice of which s/he is or was a
255
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
member. Since the deputy medical referee usually succeeds to the post of medical
referee, in effect, the medical referee chooses his/her successor. It does not appear that
much consideration is given to the issue of whether the experience and professional
background of the potential applicant fits him/her for the position. A striking example of
this was the appointment of Dr Betty Hinchliffe as Deputy Medical Referee, then Medical
Referee, of the Dukinfield crematorium. She had spent her entire career (save for two
years working in hospital immediately post-qualification and two years as a locum general
practitioner) in the field of child health, where she had a special interest in paediatric
audiology. When appointed as Deputy Medical Referee in the late 1970s, she had had no
experience of general practice or of the care and treatment of elderly people, for over 20
years. She had not completed a Form B for even longer and had completed perhaps two
Forms C during her entire professional career. Her deputy, Dr Jane Holme, had no
experience whatsoever of general practice or of the care or treatment of elderly people.
She also had spent her professional life working in the field of child health.
11.85 Home Office officials have said that they saw no reason not to rely on cremation authorities
to make proper enquiries before appointing medical referees. However, there is no
evidence that the Department made any enquiry about the selection procedures being
used or offered any advice as to how the process of appointment should be carried out.
Nor does the Department appear to have taken any steps to ensure that cremation
authorities fully understood the functions of the medical referee and his/her role within the
cremation certification system as a whole.
11.86 The lack of any proper selection procedure prior to the appointment of a medical referee
creates the impression that the position is an unimportant one, which can satisfactorily be
filled by any doctor with the requisite registration. That impression is confirmed by the lack
of training and support provided once a medical referee has been appointed.
Training and Support for Medical Referees
11.87 The Home Office provides no formal training for new appointees and little ongoing
support. There is no handbook or other reference material; new recruits are usually given
a copy of the Cremation Act and Regulations by their cremation authority but, except
insofar as it is produced locally, no explanatory material is available. Those appointed
learn by observing and talking to their colleagues at the crematorium. The Home Office
has always taken the view that, given their medical expertise, medical referees should be
able to carry out their task without the need for instruction. So far as the medical aspects
of the job are concerned, that is of course so. However, in order to do the job effectively,
it is important that a medical referee understands the role which s/he is required to perform
and the roles of others (in particular, the Form C doctor) who also play a part in the system
of cremation certification. As I shall explain later in this Chapter, it is evident that some
(perhaps many) do not. One reason for this may be that their predecessors also had no
understanding of their role and so were not in a position to pass on that knowledge to those
who followed them.
11.88 Medical referees are subject to no monitoring or audit procedures. It is true that they
attract few complaints. However, the public is largely unaware of their role and existence,
256
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
as the Shipman case has demonstrated. The only time when a medical referee is likely to
attract criticism is when s/he requests an autopsy or takes any other action which disrupts,
or threatens to disrupt, arrangements for a cremation. This rarely occurs.
Contact between Medical Referees and Others
11.89 In the past, medical referees around the country were in contact with each other through
the Association of Crematorium Medical Referees. I have referred to the Association in
Chapter Three, in connection with representations made by its members to the Home
Office over the years. The Association became defunct in 1974 and thereafter, for a period
of 28 years or so, medical referees had no forum for the exchange of ideas or the
discussion of common issues and problems. Certain enthusiastic medical referees
attempted, through the Home Office, to initiate moves to encourage contact but the Home
Office took the view that it was for the referees themselves to undertake any necessary
organisation and therefore took no active steps to assist. Recently, and in the face of the
obvious threat to their existence posed by the aftermath of Shipman’s criminal activities,
there have been moves, under the auspices of the BMA, to re-launch the Association.
11.90 The lack of any contact between medical referees has led to them becoming isolated
and unaware of different practices in operation elsewhere in the country. This is no doubt
one reason why the contents of the cremation forms issued by different crematoria have
become so divergent. Similarly, medical referees have little or no contact with other
professionals involved in operating the post-death procedures. The evidence given to
the Inquiry suggests that they rarely, if ever, speak to their local coroner. The coroner
may have no understanding of the role and functions of the medical referee. The medical
referee is unlikely to have occasion to speak directly to the registrars in his/her district.
The cremation system operates in virtual isolation (save for the exchange of forms and
contact of a purely administrative nature) from the death certification, death registration
and coronial systems.
Advice and Guidance for Medical Referees
11.91 Over the years, the Home Office has issued some advice and guidance. Examples are the
advice about the need for affirmative answers to questions 1, 2and 4 of Form C and the
requirement for the Form B and Form C doctors to be ‘demonstrably independent’.
However, such guidance has been minimal and, where not concerned with a forthcoming
change in the law, has usually been issued only in response to a direct request for advice.
In his oral evidence, Mr Robert Clifford, Head of the Coroners Section of the Animals
Procedures and Coroners Unit, which deals with cremation-related matters, emphasised
that the Home Office was concerned not to encroach upon the independence of medical
referees in relation to individual decisions that they might make. That is of course
understandable and proper. However, such a consideration would not have precluded
the issuing of general guidance and advice as to the approach to be adopted by medical
referees. In particular, it would not have precluded advice and guidance as to the role that
the medical referee was required to play within the cremation certification system as a
whole.
257
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
11.92A few medical referees have produced their own guidance notes for use locally.
Dr Gordon Pledger told the Inquiry about guidance that he had prepared, setting out what
was required of the referee and deputy referees at the crematorium at Newcastle-uponTyne,
where he is Medical Referee. He also issues guidance for doctors completing
cremation forms; a copy of his guidance notes accompanies every blank set of forms sent
out by the crematorium. In 1997, the Medical Referee at the Central Durham crematorium,
Dr Clive Buxton, issued his own guidance notes for doctors completing Forms B and C.
Those notes were subsequently reproduced in Resurgam, the journal of the Federation of
British Cremation Authorities. They sought to clarify some of the common uncertainties
about the meaning of questions appearing on Form B.
Duties of Medical Referees
11.93 The duties of the medical referee are set out in the 1930 Cremation Regulations (as
amended). Regulation 12provides that:
‘(3) He shall, before allowing the cremation, examine the application and
certificates and ascertain that they are such as are required by these
Regulations and that the inquiry made by the persons giving these
certificates has been adequate. He may make any inquiry with regard to
the application and certificates that he may think necessary ...
(5) He shall not allow the cremation unless he is satisfied that the fact
and cause of death have been definitely ascertained; and in particular, if
the cause of death assigned in the medical certificates be such as,
regard being had to all the circumstances, might be due to poison, to
violence, to any illegal operation, or to privation or neglect, he shall
require a post-mortem examination to be held, and if that fails to reveal
the cause of death, shall decline to allow the cremation unless an
inquest be opened and a certificate given by the Coroner in Form ‘‘E’’ ...
(8) He may in any case decline to allow the cremation without stating
any reason.’
These duties have remained virtually unchanged since 1903.
11.94 Having satisfied him/herself as required by regulation 12(5), the medical referee
completes the Authority to Cremate (Form F). In doing so, s/he certifies:
‘... I have satisfied myself that all the requirements of the Cremation Acts
1902 and 1952, and of the Regulations made in pursuance of these Acts,
have been complied with, that the cause of death has been definitely
ascertained and that there exists no reason for any further inquiry or
examination ...’.
11.95 Except where the coroner has certified the cause of death after autopsy or where an
inquest has been opened, the medical referee will have inspected the completed Forms
A, B and C. The only exception is that, where the Form B doctor is aware, when completing
258
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Form B, of the result of a hospital post-mortem examination (so that no Form C is required),
only Forms A and B should be submitted to the medical referee.
11.96 The time limit for delivery of the forms varies from crematorium to crematorium. At
Dukinfield crematorium, forms must be delivered not later than 11am on the working day
(Monday–Friday) before the cremation. (The note on Form B suggests that forms can be
delivered on a Saturday but the Inquiry was told that this was not in fact the case.)
Sometimes, perhaps because of delay on the part of doctors in signing the forms or for
other reasons, the forms are delivered late. Occasionally, they are delivered on the very
day of the cremation. Late delivery can cause great practical difficulties in contacting
doctors and others in connection with queries arising from the forms. In those
circumstances, it is, of course, open to the medical referee or superintendent registrar of
the crematorium to insist that the cremation be postponed because there is insufficient
time to complete the formalities. In practice, however, they will do everything possible to
avoid this, because of the distress that such postponement would cause to the
deceased’s relatives. One solution, resorted to occasionally, is to allow the funeral service
to go ahead, but postpone the actual cremation until all the formalities have been
complied with. Even this, however, is avoided if at all possible.
11.97 The result is that a medical referee is under considerable pressure to approve the forms
speedily and to ensure that any enquiries that s/he makes are limited to those that can be
accomplished within the restricted time available. This does not tend to encourage the
making of detailed enquiries. Under the Regulations, the medical referee has wideranging
powers. He or she can make any enquiry that s/he thinks necessary. He or she
can require a post-mortem examination, refer the death to a coroner or simply decline to
authorise a cremation without giving any reason. In reality, however, the evidence
received by the Inquiry suggests that the last power is never used (it is hard to imagine
the circumstances in which it could properly be) and medical referees rarely exercise their
powers to order a post-mortem examination or even to report a death to the coroner. As I
have already indicated at paragraphs 3.76 and 3.77, the Brodrick Committee reported
similar findings in 1971 and the Committee’s view was that medical referees were being
asked to perform an impossible task for which they were given neither the time nor the
facilities.
11.98 In addition, the medical referee’s examination of the forms takes place at a time when
registration of the death has occurred (so that the registrar has, implicitly, ‘approved’ the
cause of death) and when one doctor has certified, and a second doctor has confirmed,
the cause of death. The applicant has signed a form, stating that s/he has no reason to
believe that the death was suspicious. In some cases also, the medical referee will be
aware that the death has been ‘discussed with the coroner’ (in fact, more likely, a coroner’s
officer) who has also, it might be inferred, ‘approved’ the cause of death. The medical
referee’s place, at the end of this chain of persons scrutinising the death, must inevitably
affect the way s/he approaches his/her task.
11.99 There are three other aspects of the medical referee’s task that I should mention. First, it
is unrealistic that s/he should have to certify, on the basis of assertions contained in the
cremation forms, that s/he is satisfied that the cause of death has been ‘definitely
259
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
ascertained’. In the vast majority of cases, the cause of death cannot be ‘definitely
ascertained’ without an autopsy and sometimes not even then. The fact that the level of
confidence required on the part of the medical referee is unrealistically high affords no
encouragement to a medical referee to exercise a great degree of care when scrutinising
the forms and making enquiries.
11.100 Second, in the event that a medical referee orders a post-mortem examination, there can
be difficulty over who should pay for it. Some cremation authorities are willing to meet the
cost; others require the family to pay, which is obviously extremely unpopular. The cost of
the examination is, of course, in addition to the distress and inconvenience caused by the
requirement for a post-mortem examination so near to the funeral. The alternative course
is for the medical referee to refer the death to the coroner. However, if the coroner declines
to act in circumstances where the medical referee feels that the death should be
investigated further, the medical referee can be left with little choice but to order the
examination at the family’s expense. In one case of which the Inquiry is aware, a medical
referee who found himself in that position (not an isolated case, he said) discovered that
the body had already been embalmed, rendering a post-mortem examination of little or
no value. In these circumstances, the power to order a post-mortem examination can be
somewhat illusory.
11.101 Third, if a medical referee indicates his/her intention to order a post-mortem examination
or refer the death to the coroner, it is open to the applicant to dispose of the body by burial
(for which only the registrar’s disposal certificate is necessary) or to make an application
to another crematorium where the medical referee may be prepared to permit the
cremation. The Inquiry is aware of cases where this has happened. The ability of an
applicant to ‘shop around’ in this manner is obviously highly damaging to the authority and
effectiveness of the medical referee.
Certificate after Post-Mortem Examination: Form D
11.102If a medical referee does exercise his/her power to order a post-mortem examination and
the pathologist can identify a cause of death, the pathologist will complete a Certificate
after Post-Mortem Examination (Form D), stating that s/he is satisfied that the cause of
death is as stated on Form D and that there is no reason for making any toxicological
analysis or for an inquest. The medical referee will then give authority to cremate on the
basis of the information contained in Forms A and D.
Coroner’s Certificate: Form E
11.103 If a death is referred to the coroner and the coroner has ordered an autopsy, after which
s/he is satisfied that no inquest is necessary, or if the coroner has opened an inquest into
the death, the coroner may issue the Coroner’s Certificate (Form E). On the certificate, the
coroner states which of the two circumstances referred to above applies and certifies that
s/he is satisfied that there are no circumstances likely to call for a further examination of
the body. The certificate does not state the cause of death; in the case of a death where an
inquest has been opened, no cause of death will yet have been determined. The provision
whereby a Form E can be issued (and a cremation allowed to proceed) before the
260
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
conclusion of an inquest was, as I have explained in Chapter Three, introduced by the
Cremation Regulations 1965 in order to avoid the distress caused to families as a result of
having to wait many months for an inquest to be concluded before being permitted to
cremate their dead.
11.104 A sizeable proportion of the cremations dealt with by medical referees are authorised by
a coroner’s Form E. The medical referee gives authority to cremate on the basis of Forms
A and E. Neither contains information relating to the cause of death. Yet the medical
referee must complete Form F, in which s/he states that s/he is satisfied that the cause of
death has been ‘definitely ascertained’. The medical referee also has the disposal
certificate issued by the registrar. However, this does not give information about the cause
of death either. The authority to cremate given in these circumstances amounts to no more
than a ‘rubber-stamping’ of the decision made by the coroner. This anomaly was identified
in the Brodrick Report. The draft Regulations of 1989 would have made it unnecessary for
a medical referee to authorise cremation where a coroner had issued a Form E. However,
those Regulations never became law and, thus, the anomaly remains. Again, the fact that
a medical referee has no choice but to ignore the requirements of Form F when dealing
with this large group of cases does little to encourage a more careful approach when
dealing with others.
Variability of Practice among Medical Referees
11.105 The lack of Home Office guidance and contact between medical referees in different parts
of the country has had important effects on the efficacy of the system. I have already
described one important difference in relation to the completion of questions 5–8 on
Forms C.
11.106 The Inquiry also found that medical referees approached their task in different ways. In
effect, there are two schools of thought about what the task should entail. All medical
referees who gave evidence to the Inquiry agree that the forms must be carefully checked
to ensure that all the questions have been answered and that the factual information (such
as names, address and dates of birth and death) is consistently stated throughout. In
some crematoria, such clerical checks are carried out by administrative staff. It is also
generally agreed that, in satisfying him/herself before completing the declaration on Form
F, the medical referee must rely principally on reading the cremation forms submitted. He
or she will not usually embark on any independent enquiries. The differences of view arise
over what, if any, mental process the medical referee must go through in order to satisfy
him/herself ‘that the cause of death has been definitely ascertained and that there
exists no reason for any further inquiry or examination’.
11.107 Some medical referees take the view that their statutory duty requires them to scrutinise
the forms (mainly Form B) with a view to seeing whether the ‘picture’ created or the ‘story’
told by the forms hangs together and makes medical sense. Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan
described their functions in this way, although they did not, even so, see their role as an
investigative one. Plainly, such an operation requires medical expertise. On the other
hand, some medical referees take the view that theirs is essentially a clerical function.
They say that their task is to check that the forms have been properly completed, that all
261
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
questions on Forms A and B are answered, that there are affirmative answers to questions
1, 2and 4 on Form C and that the causes of death on Forms B and C are the same. They
are not required, they say, to consider the content of the forms and do not seek to discover
whether the picture presented makes medical sense. They consider that the cause of
death has been ‘definitely ascertained’ by the two doctors who have completed Forms
B and C. The medical referee, they say, is entitled to assume that those two doctors have
done their job conscientiously.
11.108 Dr Holme, formerly Deputy Medical Referee at the Dukinfield crematorium, described her
duties in this way. So did the medical referee of a crematorium that I visited personally, for
the purpose of seeing a medical referee at work. He told me that his function was to ensure
that all the boxes on the forms had been completed. He did not examine the content of the
forms. That, he said, was not his function. He had only to ensure that the information was
there and would be preserved in case it should be required for any future investigation.
When asked why, if the duties were purely administrative, it was necessary for the medical
referee to be a medical practitioner, this medical referee said that, when, as became
necessary from time to time, a medical referee had to telephone a doctor who had failed
to complete part of a form, it was necessary for such a conversation to be conducted by a
medically qualified referee as, otherwise, the certifying doctor might refuse to co-operate.
11.109 In my view, it is clear that the clerical approach cannot be what is envisaged. First, the
requirement that the medical referee should be a practitioner of at least five years’
standing makes it clear that there is an expectation that some medical expertise is to be
exercised by a doctor with some experience and authority. I cannot accept as reasonable
the suggestion that a doctor is required so that an uncooperative certifying doctor can be
brought into line. Second, the medical referee is given the power to order a post-mortem
examination. It seems clear that a medical referee who performs only a clerical check
would never have occasion to order a post-mortem examination or, for that matter, to refer
a case to the coroner. I leave out of account the fact that the wording of Form F requires
the medical referee to be personally satisfied that the cause of death has been definitely
ascertained. As I have said, that seems to be an unrealistic goal.
11.110 I am satisfied that these differing views about the functions of the medical referee are
genuinely held. It appears that the Home Office was for many years unaware of these
differing views and practices. This dichotomy of view (and misunderstanding by some)
could not, I think, have survived if medical referees had undergone any training or
appraisal, had received written guidance or had met regularly for discussion of their
professional duties and problems. There are documents in existence, such as the Report
of the Departmental Committee responsible for drafting the Cremation Regulations 1903,
which explain the function and purpose of the medical referees’ task. Those documents,
or a summary of their contents, could easily be disseminated to all medical referees.
Does the Medical Referee Perform a Useful Function?
11.111 I have described the two schools of thought as to how the medical referees’ work should
be performed. It is obvious that, if the task is essentially a clerical check, it can provide no
effective scrutiny of the accuracy and validity of the cause of death; nor can it do anything
to detect cases of concealed homicide or neglect.
262
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
11.112If the task is carried out as Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan described it, the operation should
have some value. However, it appears that medical referees very rarely exercise their
powers to stop a cremation and order a post-mortem examination. Research published in
1995 showed that, although 10% of 250 Forms B from a single cremation authority showed
errors in the cause of death, none had resulted in a referral to the coroner, a post-mortem
examination or an approach to the Form B doctor for clarification.1
11.113 Only rarely will the medical referee even speak to the coroner’s office. In the overwhelming
majority of cases, the forms are approved and the cremation proceeds. This may well be
because the papers are in order and there is no cause for concern. The task of looking for
one case with ‘something wrong’ out of thousands that are in order is a thankless one and
it cannot be easy to maintain an appropriate standard of vigilance. It seems to me that,
even where the medical referee approaches his/her task in the right way, the sheer
monotony of the task is likely to result in some faults being overlooked.
11.114 There are other reasons why even a conscientious medical referee might miss a case in
which cremation should not be allowed. As I have observed, the scrutiny takes place at
the end of the cremation certification process. The effect of what has gone before is to
engender a degree of confidence in the validity of the application to cremate. Dr Pledger
spoke of the feeling that his position was that of a longstop, who was looking only to see
if something had gone ‘hideously wrong’. Far from expecting to find anything, he would
have an expectation that all would be in order. For him to question an application would
be, in effect, to question the judgement of a range of other people who had dealt with the
death previously.
11.115 Another factor that may well affect the medical referee’s approach to his/her task is the
pressure of time, to which I have already referred. The fact that, if detailed enquiries are
to be made or an autopsy undertaken, the cremation would have to be postponed, with
consequent disruption and distress to the family, must inevitably have the effect of
discouraging a medical referee from taking such steps. There is a tension between the
requirement that the statutory procedure should be properly satisfied and the need to
avoid disruption.
11.116 The scope of the medical referee’s task is very limited. It is a paper exercise and does not
involve any independent investigation. Even if the documentation is completed
conscientiously, the forms frequently contain inadequate informationto enable the medical
referee to gain a clear picture of the events leading up to the death. Form B does not require
the doctor to provide even a brief account of the deceased’s medical history, nor of the
circumstances of the death. Such an account would be most useful to the medical referee.
As I have previously explained, the Inquiry has become aware of inconsistencies in the way
in which different doctors complete the forms. The only enquiries which most medical
referees make are of the Form B doctor, if some aspect of the form is unclear. Often, it is not
easy to contact the doctor and there is a temptation for the medical referee to make
assumptions, sometimes unwarranted, to ‘fill the gaps’. The system is based upon trust in
1 James, DS (1995) ‘An examination of the medical aspects of cremation certification: are the medical certificates required under the
Cremation Act effective or necessary?’, Medical Law International, Vol 2, pp 51–70.
263
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
the truthfulness and integrity of those taking part in the procedure.In particular, the medical
referee is dependent on the integrity of the Form B doctor.
11.117 In summary, it seems to me that the role of the medical referee is of limited value, even
when the duties are carried out, as they often are, most conscientiously. When the role is
limited to that of a clerical check, it is completely without value.
The Role of the Home Office
The Actions of the Home Office prior to Shipman’s Conviction
11.118 It has been known for over 50 years that the system of cremation certification was not
working as was intended. The Home Office has certain responsibilities in relation to
cremation procedures. In particular, it has responsibility for keeping under consideration
the need for changes to cremation legislation. I have had to consider whether, in
permitting the cremation system to remain virtually unchanged for a century, the Home
Office properly discharged its responsibilities.
11.119 It seems likely to me that the high standards expected in the early days of the last century
gradually fell out of use. I suspect, for example, that it was usual practice in the early days
for one or more of questions 5–8 to be answered in the affirmative. By 1950, it was known
that standards of completion of Forms C were poor and the Interdepartmental Committee
recommended that the Form C procedure should be strengthened. Nothing was done
and, in 1971, the Brodrick Committee recommended that the entire system of cremation
certification should be abolished as soon as the system of medical certification of the
cause of death had been strengthened. The Committee also recommended that Form C
should be abolished forthwith, even if their main recommendations could not be
immediately implemented. The Form C doctor simply relied on the Form B doctor’s
opinion, so that the second certificate was, in effect, worthless. In any event, it was, in the
Committee’s opinion, unnecessary as the risk of concealed homicide was minimal.
11.120 As I have explained in Chapter Three, in 1975, the Government of the day accepted the
Brodrick proposals (albeit with some modification to satisfy the Director of Public
Prosecutions) as its policy. Following the change of Government in 1979 and throughout
successive administrations, implementation of the Brodrick recommendations remained
the aim. The requirements for medical certification of the cause of death were to be
strengthened and the separate system of cremation certification was to be abolished. As
I have said, there were a number of stumbling blocks in the way to legislation but the main
reason why the policy was not implemented was that the Government Law Officers and
the BMA objected to the abolition of the Form C procedure. Many attempts were made to
reach a consensus on the way forward. None succeeded. However, as I have already
said, the implementation of the Brodrick proposals, which relied completely upon the
integrity of the single certifying doctor, would not have deterred Shipman from killing; nor
would it have led to his earlier detection.
11.121 I can well understand why little attention was paid to the operation of the cremation system
during the many years in which it was hoped and intended that it would be abolished. The
focus of attention was on its replacement. Although the Law Officers and the BMA wished
264
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
to see a system that retained some form of second certification, as a safeguard against
concealed homicide, only the BMA positively wished to preserve the Form C procedure.
It is apparent that there were those in Government who were sceptical of the BMA’s
motives. They thought that the BMA wanted to keep Form C because the income from it
was attractive to doctors. It is not for me to say what lay behind the BMA’s stance. They
certainly advanced their arguments on the basis that the completion by a doctor of a
second certificate provided a safeguard against a risk of concealed homicide. However,
I can understand why some were sceptical of the doctors’ position.
11.122 Many of the doctors who have given evidence about the Form C procedure stress that they
do not regard the fee they receive as a ‘perk’. They say that, although the form is simple
to complete, they often have to travel some distance to view the body. The money, they
say, is not an attraction at all. It is simply reasonable remuneration for their effort. I find that
hard to accept, for several reasons. First, the nickname for the Form C fee is ‘ash cash’.
The expression is redolent of the notion that the fee is a ‘perk’. Second, doctors often ask
their friends to complete Forms C for them. I have not been told that doctors have to ask
their friends because no other doctor will accept the burden. I have heard that doctors in
multi-handed practices take turns to share out the Forms C that come to the surgery. I have
not been told that they are sharing out the burden so that no one doctor has to shoulder
more than his/her fair share; far from it, I have the impression that doctors guard their right
to Forms C. Furthermore, in hospitals, where the majority of deaths occur, there is less
inconvenience and potentially greater income from this source.
11.123 Form C was never abolished, as the Brodrick Committee had advised. Although there are
few overt references to it within the Home Office documents, and although Mr Clifford was
anxious not to be indiscreet on the subject, it is apparent to me that there was in
Government a reluctance to ‘take on’ the medical profession. It seems that successive
Governments regarded cremation certification as a matter for the doctors. For example,
although, since 1952, the Home Secretary has had the power to fix the fees payable for
issuing cremation certificates, he has never exercised this power, but has always left it to
the BMA to recommend the appropriate rates.
11.124 Twenty seven years elapsed between the publication of the Brodrick Report and the
discovery of Shipman’s crimes. Had the Brodrick proposals been implemented, and had
Shipman still committed serial murder undetected over a period of 24 years, it would have
been impossible to criticise the Government for operating a system that had failed to
detect him. It would have been entirely reasonable for them to implement a Report of such
authority and standing. However, they did not; they tried but, in the end, their efforts came
to nothing. All the while, they knew that the existing Cremation Regulations were not
working as they were intended to work. Ought they to have done something to improve the
operation of the cremation system, given that it must at some stage have become
apparent that the Brodrick recommendations were unlikely to be implemented? The only
reform which, in my view, would have provided any effective safeguard against concealed
homicide would have been a mandatory requirement in respect of questions 5–8 of
Form C.
11.125 It seems to me that there were two stages at which the Home Office might have
considered reform of the cremation certification process. The first arose in late 1988
265
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:54 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
and early 1989, following the decision to postpone attempts to abolish the Form C
procedure until after legislation strengthening the death certification system had been
brought onto the statute book. That process would not be speedy; consultation was
necessary and it was obvious that the Cremation Regulations, including the Form C
procedure, would remain in force for some time. At that stage, the Home Office intended
to consolidate the various sets of Cremation Regulations and to bring in some
amendments. There was an opportunity to improve the Form C procedure. One of the
proposed amendments related to Form C. An affirmative answer was to be required to
questions 1, 2and 4. In fact, this would have only formalised what was already existing
practice. It appears that no consideration was given to the ‘strengthening’ of the Form C
procedure. The thinking in the Home Office at this time was that the recommendations
of the Brodrick Committee were sensible and appropriate, the risk of concealed
homicide was negligible and the Form C procedure was unnecessary. So there would
be no point in improving it. The Government Law Officers were reluctant to see its
abolition, without some compensating improvement in death certification. They still
considered that Form C provided a useful safeguard against concealed homicide.
However, they did not suggest that there was any need to strengthen the procedure,
only to keep it. It appears that the Home Office was unaware that, at some crematoria,
an affirmative answer was required to one of questions 5–8. The Home Office papers
of this period reveal no discussion about the purpose to be served by questions 5–8.
It does not appear that anyone suggested to the Home Office at that time that there
was any need for an independent check on the account of events given by the Form
B doctor, such as would be provided by consideration of questions 5–8. So, although
the opportunity for strengthening the Form C procedure through amendment of the
Regulations plainly presented itself, I do not think that the Home Office should be
criticised for not taking that opportunity. In the event, the attempt to amend and
consolidate the Regulations met with opposition and was eventually abandoned.
11.126 Given Home Office officials’ actual state of knowledge and belief about the Form C
procedure, I do not think they should be criticised for their failure to make any attempt
to strengthen the Form C procedure. They believed it to be unnecessary and a waste
of time. Their knowledge of how the system worked on the ground appears to have been
gained mainly from the Brodrick Report; they did not visit crematoria to inspect them
and did not have meetings with medical referees. They knew from the Brodrick Report
that the Form C procedure was often carried out in a perfunctory way. They did not
know that, at some crematoria, an affirmative answer to one of questions 5–8 was
required. Although the Brodrick Report had drawn attention to the fact that questions
5–8 were very frequently answered in the negative, it had not been discovered that this
was due to differing practices at particular crematoria.
11.127 However, in my view, the Home Office is to be criticised for its lack of awareness of
how the cremation certification system was operating throughout the country. It ought
not to have delegated responsibility for operation to the cremation authorities, as it did.
The Home Office should have had a policy for the selection of medical referees; it should
have provided training and support for them once appointed. It should have maintained
contact with them and ensured that they had contact with each other. Had the Home
266
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Office operated the system ‘hands on’, officials should have been aware that different
practices were followed at different crematoria; they should have known that, at some
crematoria, an affirmative answer was required to one of questions 5–8 and they should
have found out why this was so. Had they known these things, they might have realised
that a requirement for an affirmative answer to one of those questions would have
strengthened the protective effect of the procedure. Although no one had suggested
to them the need to strengthen the Form C procedure, they might have thought of it
and might have proposed that improvement. I say only that they might have done these
things because, as they believed the whole process was pointless, they might have
thought of and rejected the idea of strengthening the procedure. Even had they
proposed such an improvement, I very much doubt that it would have been successfully
incorporated into the amended Regulations. The amendments, as drafted in 1989, failed
to meet with the approval of interested parties. A significant strengthening of Form C
would certainly have aroused strong objections. As the Home Office did not regard the
Form C procedure as a whole to be important, I do not think they could have been
criticised had they failed to pursue such changes with the vigour and determination that
would have been necessary to overcome those objections.
11.128 The second occasion on which a particular opportunity arose, which should possibly have
triggered a move towards reform of the Form C procedure, occurred in the late 1990s. It
arose from a survey, conducted in Scotland and completed in September 1995, which
was drawn to the attention of the Home Office in November 1997. The survey had
discovered defects in the standard of completion of cremation forms. Advice was issued
by the Scottish Office Home and Health Department to doctors and medical referees. One
of the requirements was that at least one of questions 2–5 on Form C should be completed
in the affirmative, unless the Form C doctor had carried out a post-mortem examination.
As I have explained earlier, questions 2–5 on the Scottish Form C are the equivalent of
questions 5–8 on the forms in use in England and Wales. Unfortunately, Mr Clifford, the
official responsible for cremation issues at the time, did not understand the nature or
significance of the difference between the Scottish forms and those used in England and
Wales. He did not, therefore, fully appreciate the nature of the advice being given.
However, even had he done so, it seems unlikely that he would have been able to bring
about a change in the practice in England and Wales before 1998, when Shipman was
arrested. His reaction to the Scottish research was to decide that it would be useful to
conduct something similar in England. He took some steps towards this end but these
progressed slowly. There had never been any reason to perceive a need for urgency. I do
not think that the realisation that the Scottish system was different would have caused him
to act with any greater degree of urgency.
11.129 In short, the history of Home Office supervision of cremation procedures is not impressive.
The approach was to leave matters to the cremation authorities to an extent that I regard
as inappropriate. Officials were concerned almost entirely with attempts to abolish the
procedures – or Form C at least. That was understandable in the light of the Brodrick
Report and its underlying philosophy. In any event, I do not consider that there is any
ground on which the Home Office can be held responsible for the failure of the cremation
certification system to detect Shipman’s course of criminal conduct.
267
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Home Office Reactions since the Discovery of Shipman’s Crimes
11.130 After the discovery of Shipman’s crimes, steps were taken to set in motion reviews of the
whole system of death and cremation certification and coroner services. There was bound
to be delay before any reforms suggested by these reviews could be implemented.
However, even then, no urgent attempts were made to address the inadequacies of the
cremation certification system.
11.131 The only step taken was the despatch of a letter to medical referees, at the time of
Shipman’s conviction, reminding them of their power to refuse to authorise a cremation
and their right to refer a death to the coroner if not satisfied with the application to cremate.
The letter also reminded medical referees to be ‘vigilant at all times’ and that they should
not feel constrained from making further enquiries about a death by the wish of the family
to adhere to proposed funeral arrangements.
11.132Until very recently, it appears that the Home Office had not given any consideration to the
introduction of a requirement that one of questions 5–8 on Form C should be answered in
the affirmative. The Inquiry has now been informed that, on 6th February 2003, a meeting
was convened, at which Home Office officials met with representatives of the cremation
organisations and medical referees to discuss various proposals for the introduction of
interim improvements in the operation of the cremation certification procedures. As a
result, the Home Office is ‘to explore the experience of those crematoria which
currently require at least one mandatory affirmative answer to questions 5–8 of
cremation Form C and, if necessary, to set up a controlled pilot scheme in one or
more areas’. It is said that ‘these steps should provide useful information about the
practicality and effectiveness of introducing such a requirement generally’. I
welcome this move, belated though it is. However, I doubt the need for a pilot scheme,
given that this procedure is already operated by several crematoria in different parts of
England and Wales, together with most crematoria in Scotland. It is difficult to see why a
‘controlled pilot scheme’ should yield more information than an examination of current
practice in those areas where an affirmative answer to questions 5–8 (2–5 in Scotland) is
already required. I am also concerned to think that it is expected that a pilot scheme would
prove or disprove the effectiveness of such a change of practice. At least, I would hope
that the change would not be deemed ineffective simply because a pilot scheme failed to
uncover a murderer.
The Future of Cremation Certification
11.133 In my view, the cremation certification procedure, as presently carried out in most places,
is of very little value. As I shall be recommending a new system of certification for all
deaths, not only those to be followed by cremation, it is not appropriate to consider in detail
how it might be improved. However, like the Brodrick Committee, I too realise that my main
recommendations might not be implemented as rapidly or as completely as I would wish.
In that event, my strong recommendation is that the cremation certification system should
be preserved and that the forms should be standardised throughout the country and
modernised. Above all, it should be mandatory for the Form C doctor to question at least
268
SHIP03$$23 26-06-03 13:57:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
one person who is independent of the Form B doctor and who has some knowledge of the
circumstances of the death.
11.134 If it should appear that the post of medical referee is likely to remain in existence for more
than a few months from the publication of this Report, I recommend that any new
appointments should be scrutinised by the Home Office and should be approved only if
the applicant has suitable medical experience, as well as five years’ standing. The Home
Office should provide training and guidance material, explaining the medical referees’
role and the way in which it should be performed, and should fund periodic meetings of
an Association of Crematorium Medical Referees. Issues of this kind were discussed at
the meeting in February 2003, to which I have already referred. In the event that the
existing cremation certification procedure is to be retained for a significant period, I would
hope that these discussions will result in the speedy introduction of the interim measures
that I have suggested.
269
SHIP03P011 26-06-03 13:57:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER TWELVE
The Bereaved Relatives
Introduction
12.1 At the outset of the Stage Two hearings, the Inquiry invited a number of the relatives of
Shipman’s victims to describe their experience of the death and cremation registration
and certification procedures in operation at the time of their loss. They were also asked to
make suggestions for change and improvement. Information and opinions about the way
in which the present procedures fail to meet the needs of the bereaved were also received
from a variety of other witnesses, including registrars and coroner’s staff. At the
consultation stage, the Inquiry received responses from persons and organisations with
a particular interest in the needs of the bereaved. These included bereavement officers,
Cruse Bereavement Care (Cruse) and Victim Support. A representative from Cruse and a
bereavement co-ordinator participated in the Inquiry’s seminars.
12.2 The evidence as to present practice showed, first, that families of deceased persons are
little involved in the processes of certification and investigation of a death and that the
needs and feelings of the bereaved are sometimes not given the consideration they
deserve. Second, it demonstrated that this results in the loss of the opportunity to tap a
valuable source of information about the deceased and the circumstances of his/her
death. In my view, any changes contemplated for the future must take account of the
desirability of ensuring that families and those close to the deceased are kept informed
and are consulted and involved. However, their involvement must be handled sensitively
and not intrusively.
12.3 Although none of Shipman’s victims came from a minority ethnic or religious group,
the Inquiry became aware of the beliefs held, and special practices followed, by
various such groups whose members wish, where possible, to avoid post-mortem
interference with the body of the deceased and to arrange disposal of the body as soon
as possible after the death. Representations were received from members of the
communities of Muslims, Hindus and orthodoxand liberal and progressive Jews. The
needs of these communities must be borne in mind when the Inquiry considers
proposals for change.
Death and Cremation Registration and Certification
Understanding the Cause ofDeath
12.4 The Tameside registrars told the Inquiry that families of the deceased often did not know
what the certified cause of death was when they attended at the register office, bringing
with them the MCCD. The legal position is that the family of the deceased has no right to
see the MCCD. In practice, the informant is often used as a means of conveying the
certificate from the doctor to the registrar and it is usually in a sealed envelope. Good
practice would require most doctors who have had responsibility for the treatment of the
deceased to explain to the family the import of what they have put on the MCCD or, if it be
the case, why they have decided to report the death to the coroner. However, it is clear
271
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
that good practice in this respect is not always followed. The registrars said that families
often ask to see the MCCD and are sometimes shocked and upset to find what has been
stated as the cause of death. Sometimes they do not ‘agree’ with the stated cause.
Perhaps more often they are unaware that their relative has been suffering from the
condition to which the doctor has attributed the death.
12.5 To discover an unexpected cause of death during the registration process, when it is not
possible to discuss matters with the doctor, can only increase the relatives’ distress. The
relatives must make an immediate decision whether to postpone registration and return to
speak to the doctor or to accept that the cause will be registered as the doctor has
certified. As the death register is, in effect, a public document and as any copy of the entry
(commonly known as the ‘death certificate’) obtained by either the family or anyone else
will include the cause of death, the attribution of the death to a cause with which the family
is not content may give rise to a real and lasting sense of grievance. It appears to me that
any future system must ensure that the family of the deceased has the opportunity to
discuss the cause of death with the person who is to certify the cause before the
certification takes place. That is not to say that families should have the right to dictate
what cause of death is put on the certificate. That would be quite wrong. But they should
have the right to have the rationale underlying the cause of death explained to them. It is
highly likely that, if this is done carefully and sensitively, the concerns held by the family
will, in many cases, disappear.
12.6 The registrars also reported that families are sometimes upset when a cause of death is
given which they feel causes embarrassment, such as, for example, a cause that states
or implies that the deceased died as the result of drinking excess alcohol or of a sexually
transmitted disease. In my view, a death certificate must tell the truth, even if this causes
embarrassment, although care should always be taken by the certifier to express the
cause in proper professional terms.
12.7 I note that the Office for National Statistics (ONS) has proposed that a short version of the
death certificate should be provided in future, not including the cause of death. Such a
certificate could be used for many of the purposes for which a certificate is required for
the settling of the deceased’s estate. I think many families would welcome this as it would
provide greater privacy. However, it would still be important to ensure that the relatives
understood what had been recorded in the register of deaths, which would, of course,
contain the cause of death.
Personal Involvement in the Registration
12.8 The registrars expressed the view that many informants and members of the deceased’s
family regard their involvement in the registration process as important. Like the funeral,
it is one of the ‘rites of passage’ and part of the grieving process. From a visit I made to a
register office, and from the evidence I heard, I have the clear impression that the
registrars do all they can both to ensure that the experience of attending the register office
causes the least distress possible and to provide answers to any queries the relatives may
have relating to the practical steps that they should take following the death. As I have
already mentioned in Chapter Six, it appears from the White Paper, ‘Civil Registration: Vital
272
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Change. Birth, Marriage and Death Registration in the 21st Century‘, that it is intended that,
in future, it will be possible for registration to be effected without personal attendance. That
might be more convenient for many families. However, if and when such a change is
made, it will be important to ensure that the family of the deceased is provided with a
replacement means of contact with authority. I recognise that families often receive much
support and advice from the funeral director, but I consider that there should be open,
easy and expected contact with the authorities responsible for the post-death
procedures. I shall recommend that this contact should be with the coroner’s office.
The Views ofthe Relatives ofShipman’s Victims
Present Practice
12.9 The evidence of the relatives of Shipman’s victims showed that, although they were aware
that Shipman had signed the MCCD and although they themselves had attended to the
registration of the death, they were largely unaware of the process of cremation
certification. Members of the families signed the cremation application, Form A, after it had
been completed by the funeral director, but they never saw Form B and never met the
Form C doctor. It was clear that, had they seen the information that Shipman had given on
Form B, or had they been questioned about the circumstances of the death by someone
independent of Shipman, many would have given information which would have shown
that Shipman had lied. Such a practice might well have led to Shipman’s earlier detection,
or would at least have deterred him from killing so frequently.
12.10 As I have explained in Chapter Eleven, in some parts of the country it is usual for the Form
C doctor to speak to a member of the family, if the death has occurred in the community,
so as to obtain some independent verification of the circumstances outlined by the Form
B doctor. However, this is rare. Some doctors seem to think that this practice would be
intrusive and would upset the bereaved relatives. However, the evidence of the families
of Shipman’s victims was that they would not find such enquiries intrusive. In those areas
where it does happen and where they are warned that it will occur, the families accept it
and do not regard it as intrusive. Most family members who gave evidence stressed that
they would have welcomed the opportunity to speak to someone about the concerns they
had at the back of their minds.
12.11 Many of the relatives were naturally distressed that the present system of certification had
failed so completely to deter or detect Shipman. Their perception was that the system was
fragmented and that the various agencies were not in contact with each other.
Hopes for the Future
12.12 There was a common thread running through the evidence of the family witnesses. Most
wanted to see a thorough system of death investigation applied to all deaths and not just,
for example, to those to be followed by cremation. Some thought this would be necessary
only for sudden or unexpected deaths. Most wanted the family of the deceased to be
involved in the process and to contribute to it.
273
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
12.13 Witnesses advanced two possible suggestions for ‘a thorough investigation’. Some
suggested that there should be two doctors involved in the certification process. The
second doctor should be independent of the first and should do ‘a thorough job’, including
examination of the medical records and speaking to the family about the circumstances of
the death and any concerns family members might have. Others suggested that the death
should be referred to some independent person or body with medical expertise, who
would investigate the death, examine the medical records and speak to the family. There
was a general view that families should be consulted at an early stage and that, if they were
to be asked to examine any documents, they should be given plenty of time in which to do
so. Some family witnesses would be content if it were made easier for relatives to express
their concerns to someone who is independent. Some thought that there should be an
audit of death certification.
12.14 There was a strongly expressed preference for a system which ensured that the family
would be consulted automatically and did not depend upon the family member taking the
initiative. For example, Mrs Angela Woodruff, a solicitor and the daughter of Mrs Kathleen
Grundy, Shipman’s last victim, spoke of the sense of shock she had suffered on learning
of the death of her mother. At that time, she had no reason to suspect that her mother had
been murdered; nevertheless, the death was extremely sudden and unexpected. Her
state of shock was such that she had difficulty in pulling her thoughts together. In that
state, she (and she believes other bereaved relatives) would be unable to make the first
move to contact the authorities to express any worries. She expressed the view that any
system for consulting the family about their concerns should be proactive; it would not be
sufficient merely to provide a facility for concerns to be expressed. She said that she would
not have found it intrusive if a doctor or someone from the coroner’s office had telephoned
her to make enquiries about her mother’s death.
12.15 Mrs Jane Ashton-Hibbert, the granddaughter of Mrs Hilda Hibbert, agreed that enquiries
made by a second doctor or coroner’s officer would not be intrusive. She felt it was
essential that there should be someone wholly independent of the certifying doctor to
whom a family member could express a concern without apparently making an allegation
of impropriety and ‘putting someone’s reputation on the line’. She did not think it
appropriate that the family member should have to take the initiative to express a concern;
she thought that the initiative should come from the investigator, be it the second doctor
or the coroner’s officer. She would like the consultation, or the opportunity to express
concern, to take place at an early stage, so that the family did not feel that anything they
said would have the inevitable effect of disrupting the funeral arrangements.
12.16 Mrs Kathleen Wood, the daughter of Mrs Elizabeth Baddeley, said that there was a need
for someone independent to be involved in investigating the death before registration. She
thought that someone should speak to the family to find out about the deceased’s state
of health.
12.17 Mr David Jackson, the son of Mrs Nancy Jackson, said that even if he had realised that
there were inaccuracies on the Form B Shipman had completed in respect of his mother,
he would not have concluded that these were lies. He thought there was a need for
someone independent to speak to family members before certification was complete to
274
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
see if they had any reservations. His preference was for a second doctor to carry out these
enquiries, which would not be intrusive. He thought that a ‘bureaucrat’ would just ask ‘yes
and no’ questions. It appears to me that he recognised the need for the questions to be
asked in an appropriately professional way by someone with a degree of medical
knowledge or training.
The ‘One-Stop Shop’
12.18 Several of the relatives of Shipman’s victims expressed the opinion that, in future, there
should be one readily identifiable agency with whom the bereaved family could be in
contact in relation to a death. It appeared to them that, at present, there were several
authorities that had little or no contact with each other. They suggested that what was
required was a ‘one-stop shop’, through which all the formalities relating to the death could
be effected. This would be more convenient and less demanding for relatives at a difficult
time, rather than expecting them to be in contact with one or two doctors, a registrar, and,
possibly, the coroner’s office. Some witnesses went so far as to suggest that this agency
should also provide bereavement counselling. In my view that would not be appropriate,
as a bereavement counsellor might well need to remain involved with a family member
long after all other formalities had been concluded. Instead, such an agency should put
bereaved relatives in touch with an organisation which can provide bereavement
counselling and other support and advice. However, I recognise the merit in the
suggestion that bereaved relatives should have as few as possible points of contact at
such a difficult time. Also, I think it would be feasible and desirable for the functions of
investigation, certification, permission to dispose of the body and, possibly, even
registration of the death, to be brought under the umbrella of the coroner’s office. I shall
recommend that the coroner’s office should be the agency at the centre of the post-death
procedures.
12.19 Several witnesses expressed the view that there was a need for improved education of the
public about what to expect when a death occurs and for improved sources of information.
The leaflet produced by the Benefits Agency was thought to be useful but something of
more general application was required.
Coronial Investigation, Autopsies and Inquests
12.20 In Chapter Nine, I explained why, in my view, all coronial investigations should include
consultation with the deceased’s family and, usually, the gathering of evidence from them
and any person who has cared for the deceased during the last illness.
12.21 At present, the rights of the family to know and understand the results of an investigation
which does not proceed to inquest are very limited. The family has no right to see what the
person (usually a doctor) has said to the coroner’s office when reporting the death. Nor
does the family see the content of any form completed by a police officer or coroner’s
officer (such as the Form 751 or 751A used by the Greater Manchester Police and
described in Chapter Four). Nor, in the unlikely event that any other evidence is obtained
besides the autopsy report, is the family entitled to see it. Under rule 57 of the Coroners
Rules 1984, a person who, in the opinion of the coroner, ‘is properly interested’ is
275
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
entitled, on payment of a fee (which the coroner can waive at his/her discretion) to receive
a copy of the autopsy report.
12.22 It is apparent that, at present, many coroners and coroner’s officers do not contact a
member of the deceased’s family before deciding whether or not to ‘take over’ a death,
even though, whatever decision is made, it will be important for the family. If the coroner
is minded to decide that s/he does not have jurisdiction to hold an inquest and does not
intend therefore to ‘take over’ the death, it would be helpful to him/her to speak or to get
one of the officers to speak to a family member. The coroner or coroner’s officer might
discover that the death was possibly ‘unnatural’ or discover some concern about the
death or the last illness, which might affect the decision whether or not there was
jurisdiction. In the cases where the coroner is minded to ‘take over’ the death, it would be
courteous, humane and sensible to speak to a member of the family to explain the reasons
for that decision.
12.23 If the coroner intends to order an autopsy, as will generally be the case under the present
legislation if s/he decides s/he has jurisdiction, s/he should explain to the family why this
is necessary and could take the opportunity to explain why it might be necessary for tissue
samples to be taken for histological or toxicological investigation. This would give the
family an opportunity to express any reservations or objections they may have about an
autopsy. It appears to me that trouble is caused when the decision is taken without
consultation or explanation. Mrs Lesley Creasey, the niece of Miss Ada Warburton, one of
Shipman’s last victims, expressed the belief that few people would object to an autopsy,
provided that they knew that there was a good reason for it. Professor Margaret Brazier,
Chair of the Retained Organs Commission, who has extensive experience of the attitudes
of the bereaved towards autopsies and the taking and retention of organs and tissues, told
an Inquiry seminar that little objection is encountered provided that the intentions and
reasons are explained to the family openly and honestly.
12.24 The expression ‘properly interested person’ in the Coroners Rules allows the coroner to
exercise a discretion as to whom s/he regards as being sufficiently close to the deceased
to have a right of access to the autopsy report. This highlights a difficulty that arises when
considering the rights and reasonable expectations of the bereaved. In this Report, I have
used the expressions ‘family’ and ‘relatives’ to indicate anyone who is sufficiently close to
the deceased to have a proper interest in the cause of death and any investigation into it.
I recognise that defining the class of person with such an interest is not easy. Many close
and enduring ties of affection are formed outside the framework of the conventional family.
Those with responsibility for determining who in a particular case should be consulted, or
should have access to information about a death, should be given guidance on how to
make a decision. In my view, such guidance should give full recognition to ties of affection
alone, as well as those also recognised by law. I say nothing more about this, as I
understand that the Department of Health (DoH) is currently undertaking work on such
guidance. I shall continue to use the words ‘family’ and ‘relative’, with the intention that they
should include any person with a sufficient interest.
12.25 One difficulty for relatives of a deceased person whose body has been subject to autopsy
is that the autopsy report may not be readily understandable to the lay person; explanation
276
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
is needed. It is the practice at the Greater Manchester South District coroner’s office to
suggest to the family that they should take the report to a general practitioner. A better
solution, possible under the present legislation, would be for the family to have, on
request, an explanation from someone in the coroner’s office with the necessary medical
expertise. If there is no such person, the family could meet the pathologist concerned.
However, the inability of many legally qualified coroners or members of their staff to
provide an explanation which can be understood by a lay person, demonstrates, yet
again, the need for medical expertise in the coroner’s office.
12.26 Apart from the autopsy report, there is no right under the Coroners Rules for a ‘properly
interested person’ to receive any other form of evidence in advance of an inquest. Many
coroners do permit advance disclosure of witness statements and other reports, but this
is a discretionary matter. At the inquest, the family will eventually hear the evidence of the
pathologist and will have the opportunity to ask questions. Pathologists are often willing to
speak informally to family members after the inquest to clarify any aspects of their
evidence that the family has not understood or has felt unable to ask questions about
during the hearing.
12.27 In my view, there is a need to ensure that, whether or not there is to be an inquest, the family
receives an adequate account of any investigation into the death, couched in nontechnical
language. Preferably, this should be in writing, so that it can be referred to again,
but sometimes an oral explanation will be desirable as well.
12.28 In September 2002, the DoH produced a consultation paper entitled ‘Families and Post
Mortems: a Code of Practice’. This document sets out draft recommended practice for all
those involved in communicating with relatives of individuals (both children and adults)
who may undergo or have undergone an autopsy. It seeks to ensure, among other things,
that those close to the deceased person understand the reasons for hospital and
coroners’ autopsies, the processes involved and their rights in the decision-making
process. It deals with issues of consent for the retention of organs and tissues. It includes
guidance on good practice in the provision of bereavement services. The formulation of
guidelines for good practice in this difficult and sensitive area is plainly an important step.
I hope that, in due time, an approved code will be issued and will assist bereaved families
in coming to terms with the need for an autopsy in certain cases.
12.29 I note also that Home Office Research Study 241, entitled ‘Experiencing Inquests’,
described concern about the variable degrees to which families were involved in, and
kept informed about, preparations for inquests.
Two Related Issues
12.30 Two specific matters of concern were raised by the families of Shipman’s victims. There
is a common thread; it is that those in authority (in these two cases, the Coroner) did not
show proper consideration for the feelings of the bereaved. Instead, they followed normal
or convenient procedures, apparently without thought for the consequence for the
individuals affected.
12.31 Some distress was caused to the families of many of Shipman’s patients in May 2001,
when the Coroner for Greater Manchester South District, Mr John Pollard, opened – and
277
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
then immediately adjourned – inquests into 232 deaths, without giving any notice to the
families of his intention to do so. As I explained in Chapter Two of the First Report, this
procedure was adopted in order to avoid duplication of the Inquiry’s investigative work
and of my findings in relation to the deaths. The opening of the inquests was, therefore, to
be a pure formality; no evidence was to be called and no decision taken. However,
although rule 19 of the Coroners Rules requires a coroner to notify the date, time and place
of an inquest to the spouse, near relative or personal representative of the deceased
whose name and address are known to him/her, Mr Pollard took the view that it would be
too great an administrative burden to expect him to find the names and addresses of the
families of Shipman’s patients, in respect of whom inquests were to be opened. I fully
accept that Mr Pollard did not intend to be insensitive to the feelings of the families
concerned; indeed, when he realised that he had caused distress, he apologised.
However, the incident demonstrates the need for those in authority to have at the forefront
of their minds the fact that they are dealing with people whose emotions may be in a fragile
state and to make allowance accordingly.
12.32 Mrs Woodruff was much distressed when she learned that the cause of her mother’s
death, as it appeared in the register of deaths, had been altered without her knowledge
and in terms that she found offensive and deeply distressing. It will be recalled that
Shipman certified that Mrs Grundy had died of ‘old age’. In fact, Shipman had killed her
by administering an overdose of morphine or diamorphine. In January 2000, he was
convicted of her murder. Mrs Grundy’s body had been exhumed on 1st August 1998. It
was then subjected to autopsy and toxicological tests which revealed the true cause of
her death. That information was sent to the Coroner. On 11th January 1999, Mr Pollard
opened an inquest into Mrs Grundy’s death. He then immediately adjourned it, pending
the outcome of the criminal trial. He sent to the registrar, as he was required to do, a
certificate setting out the particulars required for registration, including the cause of death.
Usually, when an inquest is adjourned pending a criminal trial, the death will not have been
registered and the certificate will be necessary to enable the death to be registered and
the deceased person’s affairs to be settled. The family of the deceased person will need
the certificate and will be aware that it is to be or has been issued. Mrs Grundy’s case was
unusual because her death had been registered some time previously and her family were
in no immediate need of the certificate. On 12th January 1999, a new entry was made in
the register of death, recording particulars of Mrs Grundy’s death in accordance with the
certificate forwarded by the Coroner.
12.33 Mr Pollard did not inform Mrs Woodruff of his actions. Following Shipman’s conviction,
Mrs Woodruff wished to ensure that the death register was corrected. She contacted
Mr Pollard to enquire whether this was possible. She found, to her surprise, that it had
already been done. This would not have mattered so much of itself (although I think she felt
that it had been a discourtesy to effect the change without telling her), but she was greatly
distressed to find that her mother’s death was now attributed to ‘overdose ofmorphine’.
There was nothing to show that this was not self-administered; future generations in the
family might wonder if their ancestor had been a heroin addict. Mr Pollard explained that
he had merely followed the usual procedure. Usually, when he sent a Form 100B to the
registrar with the result of an autopsy, the family would be aware of his actions as they
278
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
would attend at the register office to register the death; if there had been an inquest, the
family would be aware of the outcome and would know how the cause of death was to be
registered. In the case of an inquest adjourned pending the outcome of criminal
proceedings, the deceased’s relatives would usually, as I have said, need the coroner’s
certificate to effect registration of the death and would see the certified copy of the death
entry, including the cause of death stated therein. Mr Pollard also made the point that he
was required to provide a cause of death to the registrar in accordance with the autopsy
report. He had merely copied the cause of death given by the pathologist.
12.34 Once again, I am sure that Mr Pollard did not intend to be discourteous to Mrs Woodruff;
nor did he wish to cause her and her family distress. But the following of ‘procedures’,
without thought for the consequence, in what was plainly a very unusual case, resulted in
understandable distress. Consultation with Mrs Woodruff would, I am sure, have led to a
satisfactory resolution of these problems. At the very least, it would have enabled her to
understand what was being done and the reasons for it.
The Special Needs ofMinority Groups
12.35 Religious beliefs have always played an important role in the practice relating to the
disposal of the dead. Although cremation is now the most common method of disposal in
England and Wales, some communities do not practise it. Many Roman Catholics prefer
interment. OrthodoxJews and Muslims always inter their dead. Hindus always cremate
theirs.
12.36 For some religious groups, it is of great importance that the disposal takes place very
shortly after the death. OrthodoxJews prefer that the burial should take place before
sundown on the day of the death; otherwise, they wish it to take place as early as possible
on the following day. For Muslims and Hindus, it is also important to avoid any delay
between death and disposal.
12.37 For Muslims and orthodoxJews, it is also important, if at all possible, to avoid the need for
any post-mortem interference with the body. There are also, of course, some people who
are strongly opposed to invasive post-mortem examination, not on the ground of religious
belief, but simply as a matter of conviction.
12.38 In the course of the consultation process, the Inquiry received responses from
representatives of several minority groups, who were anxious to ensure that any changes
the Inquiry might recommend in the procedures for death investigation and certification
should not have an adverse effect on them. I am grateful to those who contributed in this
way. I am particularly grateful to Mr Laurence Brass, who attended one of the seminars as
the representative of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, for his illuminating explanation
of the philosophy behind the practices of orthodoxJews and of the practical effects upon
the family of a deceased person of delay before the funeral. I was grateful too for his
unequivocal statement that, although orthodoxJews will always wish to avoid an autopsy,
they recognise that there are times when the law demands that one be carried out. The
Muslim community adopts the same attitude.
12.39 Because of the need to avoid delay before disposal, and in particular because there may
be a wish to inter a body during a weekend, the orthodoxJews and Muslims have sought
279
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
to make special arrangements with the registrars and coroners in their districts. The
evidence suggests that these arrangements are more successful in some areas than
others. For example, I was told, during a visit to a register office, that the registrars provide
an out of hours service. An on-duty registrar attends at a local synagogue and mosque at
specified times and will issue a disposal certificate on production of a valid and
acceptable MCCD. The registrar will have with him/her the office mobile telephone, on
which s/he can be contacted if a problem arises. The on-duty registrar will be able to
contact a member of the coroner’s staff if necessary (and, if necessary, the coroner
himself). I understand that similar arrangements are made in some, but by no means in
all, areas.
12.40 In some areas, the coroner will arrange for an autopsy to take place at the weekend in
order to facilitate early burial. Dr Nigel Chapman, HM Coroner for Nottinghamshire, is able
to do so. Mr Christopher Dorries, HM Coroner for South Yorkshire (West) cannot, although
it is always possible to arrange an urgent autopsy in the case of a suspicious death.
Mr Leonard Gorodkin, HM Coroner for Greater Manchester City District, permits an
alternative to invasive autopsy in some cases where the cause of death is uncertain.
Members of the orthodoxJewish community fund an arrangement whereby the body is
examined using a magnetic resonance scanner. If the consultant radiologist is satisfied
(as he sometimes is) that the cause of death can be adequately determined, the Coroner
will accept the result and will certify the cause of death according to the scan. The issue
of whether or not this practice complies with the provisions of the Coroners Act 1988 has
not been raised in the courts.
12.41 It appears to me that, although the community leaders of the minority groups are not
entirely content with the present arrangements, their main concern is that their position
should not be worsened as the result of any future changes. I can well understand their
concern as, in the light of the Shipman case, there is a general expectation that death
investigations will be made more thorough and are, therefore, likely to take longer.
12.42 In my view, the reasonable expectations of all sections of the community must be met.
We live in a multicultural society and, if the needs of minority groups require the provision
of additional resources, so be it. I do not think that such arrangements should be left
entirely to local negotiation, as at present. There should be recognised protocols for
dealing with those needs, applicable throughout England and Wales. I am not
suggesting that especially favourable arrangements should be made just for those who
can demonstrate that they hold a particular set of beliefs. The reasonable expectations
of all should be met, whether they are Muslim, Jew, Christian, atheist or of any other
faith or persuasion. Nor must it be thought that I am advocating any relaxation of the
legal requirements that are now in force, or will come into effect in the future. I suggest
that the system should be sufficiently well resourced so that, if anyone expresses a need
for speed in completing the post-death formalities, it will be possible to meet that need.
Insofar as autopsies are concerned, my view is that all members of society (regardless
of religious persuasion) should be entitled to have their objections heard and taken into
account; in the face of an objection, an autopsy should be ordered only if it is really
necessary.
280
SHIP03$$24 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
12.43 As I have already indicated, I shall recommend that the coroner’s office should be at the
centre of all post-death procedures. In my view, that office should provide a 24-hour
service for advice and urgent death certifications. If my recommendations are brought into
effect, I believe that the position of those with particular expectations will be improved,
rather than worsened. That is certainly my intention.
281
SHIP03P012 26-06-03 13:32:02 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Death of Mrs Renate Overton
Introduction
13.1 In Phase One, the Inquiry investigated the death of Mrs Renate Overton, who died on 21st
April 1995, at the age of 47. For 14 months before her death, she had lain unconscious
and brain damaged in Tameside General Hospital. She had been admitted in the late
evening of Friday, 18th February 1994. During that evening, Shipman had attended her
home to treat her for an asthma attack. She had collapsed in his presence, in cardiac and
respiratory arrest. Mrs Overton’s daughter was in the house and an ambulance was
called. By the time the ambulance arrived, Mrs Overton was deeply and irreversibly
unconscious. The paramedics re-started her heart and took her to hospital. Shipman
himself recorded in Mrs Overton’s medical records that he had given her a quantity of
diamorphine. My conclusion was that Shipman had deliberately given Mrs Overton an
overdose of diamorphine (or possibly morphine), intending to kill her, and that this had
caused her collapse, her unconsciousness and, ultimately, her death. My decision in this
case is at page 283 of Volume Five of my First Report.
13.2 Consideration of this death in Phase One caused me to realise that it had many disturbing
features, quite apart from Shipman’s own actions. First, it became apparent to me from
examination of the hospital records that the doctors at the Tameside General Hospital
realised that Shipman had given Mrs Overton an intravenous bolus dose (i.e. a dose given
quickly and ‘in one go’) of an opiate (they thought it was 20mg morphine), which had
probably caused her collapse. It also appeared that they knew that such a dose, given in
that way, was excessive and dangerous, especially when given to a patient suffering from
asthma. Yet, it appeared that no report had been made of Shipman’s conduct and no
investigation into Mrs Overton’s collapse was initiated. It seemed possible that an
opportunity to uncover Shipman’s criminality had been missed. Second, Mrs Overton’s
death was reported to the Coroner. The report of the death drew attention to the possibility
that morphine administration with asthma had been an underlying cause of death. An
autopsy had taken place but had recorded that the death was due to hypoxic cerebral
degeneration and was due to ‘natural causes’. No inquest was held. It appeared possible
that a second opportunity to uncover Shipman’s criminality had been missed.
13.3 In Phase Two of the Inquiry, I was to examine the actions of those with responsibility for
the procedures and investigations following the deaths of Shipman’s victims. I was also to
examine the conduct of those with responsibility for the monitoring of primary care
provision and the use of controlled drugs. I resolved that the circumstances of
Mrs Overton’s death, and the conduct of all those involved in her treatment and in
reporting and enquiring into the circumstances of her death, should be fully investigated.
This Chapter contains the results of that investigation.
Background
13.4 Mrs Overton was a cigarette smoker and probably drank quite heavily. She suffered from
asthma, hypothyroidism, epilepsy, anxiety and depression. She was, nevertheless, active
and independent. She had previously worked as a nurse.
283
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.5Mrs Overton’s medical records show that, until 10th February 1994, she had never
complained of any symptoms suggestive of ischaemic heart disease. On that date,
according to the handwritten records, Mrs Overton attended Shipman’s surgery for a
routine asthma check, almost certainly carried out by the practice nurse. The notes
suggest that, whilst there, Mrs Overton complained of a heavy feeling in her chest,
numbness in her left arm and shortness of breath. It appears that Shipman was told of this,
possibly saw Mrs Overton and prescribed Tildiem, an anti-anginal and anti-hypertensive
drug. There is a corresponding entry in the computerised records describing chest pain
and the prescription of Tildiem. Shipman added no further details to the history, recorded
no examination and arranged no investigation.
13.6 In my First Report, I found that it was not possible to determine whether or not these
symptoms were in fact cardiac in origin. However, I doubt that they were. Although
Mrs Overton’s smoking habit put her at risk of cardiac disease, a battery of tests following
her admission to hospital suggested that she did not have heart disease. The autopsy
carried out in April 1995revealed no ischaemic heart disease. I find it suspicious that,
having apparently diagnosed angina, Shipman instigated no further investigations.
The Events of Friday,18th February 1994
Mrs Overton’s Collapse
13.7 In February 1994, Mrs Overton was living at 56A Green Street, Hyde, with her 22 year old
daughter, Mrs Sharon Carrington.
13.8 At about 8pm on 18th February 1994, Mrs Overton returned home after having been out
drinking in Hyde. Mrs Carrington thought that her mother had had too much to drink; also
she was wheezing quite badly. After a short while, Mrs Overton telephoned Shipman
because of her breathing problems. Mrs Carrington was not particularly concerned
because the breathing difficulties did not appear to be unduly serious.
13.9 Shipman arrived within about half an hour. Mrs Carrington showed him into the front room
where her mother was waiting. He had brought a nebuliser with him. A nebuliser is a
portable air compressor; it delivers a drug to the patient in the form of a fine mist, which
the patient inhales through a mask. This is a very effective way of giving a drug to a patient
suffering an asthma attack, when co-ordination and respiratory effort are often poor.
Mrs Carrington decided to go up to her room, leaving her mother, as she thought, in safe
hands. She told Shipman where he could find her if he needed her. She went to her room
and closed the door behind her.
13.10 Between ten and 15minutes later, Mrs Carrington heard Shipman banging on the
bannister rail and shouting for her to come downstairs quickly. She came on to the landing
and saw Shipman at the foot of the stairs. She went downstairs and followed him into the
front room where she saw her mother lying on her back on the floor, apparently
unconscious. She sounded as though she was gasping for air.
13.11 At Shipman’s request, Mrs Carrington commenced mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and, as
she did so, Shipman gave external cardiac massage. They continued in this way for a
284
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
short while until Shipman reached into his bag and took out a needle and syringe.
Mrs Carrington asked Shipman what he was intending to inject. She cannot recall
Shipman’s exact response but he said either that it was morphine or that it was adrenaline.
He said that the injection was to ease Mrs Overton’s breathing and he proceeded to inject
the contents of the syringe into the crook of Mrs Overton’s left arm. Within moments of the
injection Mrs Overton seemed to stop breathing altogether.
13.12 Shipman instructed Mrs Carrington to telephone for an ambulance. She left the room to
make the telephone call. She recalls that Shipman shouted to her, ‘Tell them she’s gone
into respiratory arrest.’ When she returned to the front room, Mrs Carrington continued with
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and Shipman continued with cardiac massage. According
to Mrs Carrington, the ambulance arrived within a few minutes.
The Arrival of the Ambulance
13.13 The Greater Manchester Emergency and Paramedic Service Patient Report Form (PRF)
reveals that the ambulance crew received the call to attend Mrs Overton’s house at
9.33pm and arrived at 9.40pm. The crew members were Mr Neil Harrop, a paramedic and
himself a patient of Shipman, and Mr Michael Smith, an ambulance technician. Both gave
oral evidence to the Inquiry. They said that they saw Mrs Overton lying on her back on the
floor and that cardiopulmonary resuscitation was in progress.
13.14 Mr Smith took over the resuscitation from Shipman while Shipman gave the history to
Mr Harrop. He explained that he had been called out to see Mrs Overton because she was
suffering an asthma attack. He said that, whilst he was with her, she had begun to
complain of chest pain and he had suspected she was suffering a heart attack. He said
that he had given morphine because of her pain. Mr Harrop recorded on the PRF that the
mechanism of injury or medical history was cardiac arrest.
13.15Mr Harrop assessed Mrs Overton’s condition. He detected neither pulse nor respiration.
The heart was in ventricular fibrillation. He attempted defibrillation. A first attempt met with
no success, and a second, though partially successful, was not effective in restoring a
proper heartbeat or sinus rhythm. It resulted in a period of electromechanical
disassociation (EMD), a hybrid state of affairs in which there is discernible electrical
activity within the heart but no pulse.
13.16 At about 9.50pm, Mr Harrop administered intravenous adrenaline (which was appropriate
treatment) and succeeded in establishing a sinus rhythm. However, Mrs Overton
remained in respiratory arrest. Mr Harrop then gave lignocaine so as to reduce the risk of
refractory ventricular fibrillation. Mrs Overton was then transferred to the ambulance and
taken to hospital.
13.17 Mr Harrop recorded his treatment of Mrs Overton on the PRF. When he first completed the
form, he omitted to mention that the second attempt at defibrillation had resulted in EMD.
The top copy of the PRF was left at the hospital with Mrs Overton. When he left the hospital,
Mr Harrop realised that he had made an error and, on the carbon copy, he noted that the
second attempt had resulted in EMD and that the intravenous adrenaline had then
produced a sinus rhythm. The carbon copy was recovered from the file retained by the
ambulance service.
285
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.18 Mr Harrop also recorded on the PRF that a spontaneous pulse was achieved at the scene.
He explained in evidence that, by this expression, he meant that the heart was ‘beating on
its own with no longer having to do cardiac compressions’. Although his use of this term
has been questioned, I think that his use of the word ‘spontaneous’ was entirely
reasonable.
13.19 According to Mr Harrop, either he or Mr Smith would have contacted the hospital by radio
to tell the staff that they were bringing in a patient who was ‘post-VF arrest’, to describe the
treatment they had given and to advise of their estimated time of arrival. He said that they
would not necessarily have informed the hospital of the circumstances giving rise to the
collapse, prior to arrival at the hospital. Such information would usually be communicated
on arrival and, as I will explain shortly, I am sure that this is what happened on this
occasion.
13.20 Even at the time, it struck Mr Harrop as very unusual that Shipman should have
administered morphine to a patient who was experiencing breathing difficulties. He knew
that morphine depresses the central nervous system, acts as a respiratory depressant
and would normally be contra-indicated for a patient suffering from asthma. Mr Harrop did
not raise the issue with Shipman, partly because he would always defer to the judgement
of a doctor and partly because he was too busy.
Shipman’s Note of His Treatment and First Contact with the Hospital
13.21 Shipman’s handwritten note for 18th February 1994 is uncharacteristically detailed. It
reads as follows:
‘V[visit] Called at 8.50.
arrived 9.15 – Acute Asthma
given nebuliser
Pulmicort nebul. # 1
Ventolin nebul # 5ml.
BP 150/100. HR 120/m
Resp ( 30.
After nebuliser A/E % BS good
not cyanosed
Approx 9.30 collapsed C/O chest
pain sweating ! pulse thready
given IV diamorphine 10mg stat (only
dose in bag)
Settled then ?arrested
Laid down ECM # 5
Daughter called
MTM/established patient
ECM/not cyanosed
pupils dilated fixed
Ambulance called. pupils dilated
ECM/ maintained
286
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
MTM/
15 mins Ambulance crew IV Adrenaline
IV Lignocaine. Intubated pink
pupils fixed dilated’
Then, continued on a separate sheet:
‘H/R. established output OK
[illegible] No respiration established
]TGH
CAS S/N informed of arrival
! diagnosis ! Rx’
13.22 This note suggests that, when Shipman arrived at 9.15pm, he found Mrs Overton suffering
an acute asthma attack. He gave Pulmicort and Ventolin through a nebuliser. He recorded
Mrs Overton’s blood pressure as 150/100 and her heart rate at 120 beats per minute. The
respiratory rate was said to be greater than 30 breaths per minute. The note states that,
after the nebuliser, Mrs Overton’s air entry was equal on both sides and the breath sounds
were good. She was not cyanosed. If this were so, it would represent a good response to
the nebuliser.
13.23 The note also suggests that, at about 9.30pm, Mrs Overton collapsed, complaining of
chest pain. She was sweating profusely and her pulse was thready. Shipman’s response
was apparently to give Mrs Overton 10mg diamorphine intravenously, which, he noted,
was the only dose available in his bag. If that were intended to be an excuse for giving a
larger than appropriate dose, it would not be a satisfactory one. Even though the doctor
might load a large dose into the syringe, he need not inject it all. When giving an opiate
for the relief of cardiac pain, the injection should be given slowly, and should be stopped
as soon as the desired effect has been achieved. This method of administration is known
as titration against response and it should be contrasted with the administration of a ‘stat’
or ‘bolus’ dose. It appears from the handwritten record that Shipman had originally written
not ‘diamorphine’, but ‘morphine’. Diamorphine is twice as potent as morphine. The note
says that Mrs Overton ‘settled’ but then ‘?arrested’, which would suggest that her
heartbeat and respiration probably stopped. The rest of the note describes Shipman’s
attempts to resuscitate Mrs Overton, his calling of her daughter and the arrival of the
ambulance crew. There are three references in the note to Mrs Overton’s pupils being
dilated or fixed and dilated.
13.24 The last two lines of the note suggest that Shipman himself contacted the casualty
department of the hospital and told a staff nurse there of Mrs Overton’s imminent arrival,
the diagnosis he had made and the treatment he had given. It is not clear who took that
message but it is likely that it contributed to the history as recorded in the hospital records.
13.25Mrs Carrington contacted her mother’s parents to tell them of Mrs Overton’s collapse.
They came to the house and arrived just as the ambulance was leaving. Mrs Carrington
travelled in the ambulance; her grandparents followed. Mrs Carrington has no recollection
of the journey, no doubt due to the extremely distressing nature of the situation in which
she found herself.
287
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Arrival at the Hospital and Triage
13.26 Mr Harrop recalled that, when the ambulance arrived at the casualty department, at about
10.10pm, Mrs Karen Taylor, the triage nurse, and other emergency staff were waiting at
the entrance and Mrs Overton was taken to the resuscitation area. Mr Harrop gave the
history to the casualty staff and someone told him that Shipman either was or had been on
the telephone.
13.27 Mrs Taylor made the first entry in the clinical notes. It reads as follows:
‘H/O [history of] asthma attack
SB [seen by] GP at home
given nebuliser
Pulmicort ! Ventolin
after neb Pt [patient]
went into cardiac
arrest.
O/A [on arrival] Intubated i/c [with cardiac]
output
Given morphine by
GP’
13.28 In evidence, Mrs Taylor said that she believes that she must have obtained this history
from the ambulance personnel. She would have made the note after her involvement with
the patient ceased, which would have been immediately after she had seen Mrs Overton
safely into the resuscitation room. She was with Mrs Overton for only about ‘a couple of
minutes’.
13.29 Mrs Taylor said that she was struck, as Mr Harrop and Mr Smith had been, by the
information that a respiratory depressant, such as morphine, had been given to someone
suffering an asthma attack. This was most unusual and her immediate thought was that
the doctor had made a mistake. Her evidence was similar to that of many of her medical
and nursing colleagues. She knew that morphine should not normally be given to an
asthmatic. If it is to be given, perhaps because of the presence of severe chest pain
suggestive of a heart attack, she knew that it should be titrated against response and, had
she been told that 20mg had been given, she would have known that that would be an
excessive dose.
13.30 Mrs Taylor’s note makes no mention of the dosage of morphine given. This suggests that
she was not told the dosage. If she had been told, I think she would have noted it in the
records. Also, the ambulance crew have no recollection that they were told the dosage. It
appears that the information about the dosage had not yet been communicated to those
in charge of Mrs Overton’s care.
Assessment by the Casualty Doctor
13.31 The first hospital doctor to see Mrs Overton that night was Dr Simon Siong Sih Lee, the
casualty senior house officer (SHO). He does not remember having any contact with the
288
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
family. Dr Lee’s responsibility was to maintain Mrs Overton in a stable condition and, once
he had done so, to pass her care on to his specialist colleagues. He was directly involved
with her treatment for about ten minutes. He probably referred Mrs Overton first to the
medical SHO on call, Dr Li Cher Loh. There is the possibility that he simultaneously
referred Mrs Overton to the SHO in anaesthetics, Dr Ratna Mukhopadhyay, who certainly
became involved in Mrs Overton’s treatment within a short time. The precise sequence is
of no great importance.
13.32 Dr Lee made an entry in the records at 10.30pm, which reads as follows:
‘asthmatic ! H/O IHD (?MI previously)
Asthmatic attack (SOB and wheezy)]
Respiratory arrest ] cardiac arrest
VF ] D/C Shocked into SR ! Adrenaline # S Lignocaine # 1
by Paramedic
No chest pain before collapsing
given morphine 20mg IV by GP
On arrival o/e Intubated correct position
o pneumothorax AE [illegible]
O2 Sat 99% on 12 l/m
P 107 BP 108/73
Rx – Naloxone
– Blood (FBC,U ! E [illegible])
– CXR,ECG – SR
Admit ITU’
13.33 This note suggests that Mrs Overton was a known asthmatic with a history of ischaemic
heart disease who had possibly suffered a myocardial infarction in the past; she had
suffered an asthma attack, with symptoms of shortness of breath and wheeze, which
had been followed by respiratory arrest and then cardiac arrest. She had gone into
ventricular fibrillation and the paramedics had then ‘shocked’ her into sinus rhythm. She
had also been given adrenaline and lignocaine. Dr Lee noted that she had suffered no
chest pain before collapsing and that she had been given 20mg morphine intravenously
by her GP. This is the first reference to the dose of morphine given. The note states that
the dose was given intravenously but does not say whether it had been titrated against
response or given as a bolus or stat dose. On examination, Dr Lee found that
Mrs Overton had been correctly intubated. There was no pneumothorax and it appears
from the note that air entry was equal on both sides. Dr Lee administered naloxone, the
antidote to morphine. It is clear that he thought that morphine was the cause or one of
the causes of Mrs Overton’s collapse and he told the police that the dosage of naloxone
was 400mg. Blood samples were sent for examination. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was
ordered and showed that the heart was in sinus rhythm. A chest x-ray was ordered.
Mrs Overton was to be admitted to the Intensive Treatment Unit (ITU).
13.34 I cannot be sure who was the source of the information that Mrs Overton had suffered no
chest pain prior to her collapse. Mrs Carrington did not believe that her mother had
289
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
suffered any chest pain and it is possible that she gave this information directly to Dr Lee.
It is most unlikely that it came from Mr Harrop, who seems to have told Mrs Taylor that
Mrs Overton had collapsed complaining of chest pain. It is clear that Dr Lee had not seen
Mrs Taylor’s note when he made his own record.
13.35As to the dosage and mode of administration, Dr Lee told the police in February 1999 that
he had some recollection that Shipman had telephoned the casualty department and told
a member of staff that he had given Mrs Overton 20mg morphine. In the statement he
made to the Inquiry in November 2002, which he essentially confirmed in his oral
evidence, Dr Lee said that he believed that, after he had been told that morphine had been
administered, he asked one of the nurses to telephone Shipman to find out exactly how
much morphine Mrs Overton had been given. His recollection was that Shipman could not
at first be contacted but that he later telephoned the hospital to give the information. Dr Lee
explained that he would have wanted to know how much morphine had been given so that
he would be able to administer an appropriate dosage of the antidote.
13.36 A second entry in Mrs Overton’s general practitioner records about the events of that night
also strongly suggests that Shipman was the source of the information concerning the
dose. It reads as follows:
‘18/2/94 T 10.45 CAS Rang - S/N
? dose of diamorphine at time
No established respiration yet.’
13.37 This entry seems to record that the staff nurse from the casualty department of the hospital
had telephoned Shipman at about 10.45pm, querying the dosage of diamorphine (or
morphine) he had given. It is most likely that it was Shipman, therefore, who provided the
information that he had given 20mg of morphine. He had at an earlier point in the general
practitioner records written that it was 10mg diamorphine. Insofar as there is an obvious
discrepancy between the two sets of notes, with the general practitioner notes implying
he told the staff nurse that it was diamorphine that was given, and the nursing notes
suggesting that he said that morphine was given, I prefer the latter. In other words, I
believe that Shipman said in this telephone call that he had given 20mg morphine. In fact,
he had given a substantial overdose of diamorphine.
Assessment by Dr Loh
13.38 Dr Loh was probably the next doctor after Dr Lee to see Mrs Overton. He probably saw
her shortly before 10.40pm. He now lives in Malaysia and provided a witness statement
to the Inquiry, in which he elaborated on the clinical notes that he made at the time. He did
not attend to give oral evidence.
13.39 Dr Loh assessed Mrs Overton in the casualty department and decided that she should be
transferred to the ITU. He contacted the SHO in anaesthetics, Dr Mukhopadhyay, through
whom the necessary transfer arrangements were to be made. Dr Loh recollects that
someone mentioned at some stage that Shipman had telephoned the hospital.
290
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
13.40 After seeing Mrs Overton, Dr Loh made an extensive entry in the records, beginning at
about 11pm. The first part of that note is self-explanatory and concerns Mrs Overton’s
collapse and resuscitation:
‘Well
Went out w 3pm today
Came homex— 9pm.
‘‘Wheeze’’ ! ‘‘SOB’’
Knocked on daughter’s door
(lives -
c her).
Called GP ]
Gave Nebuliser. Partially
relieved. dev. ?chest pain
Given IV ‘‘Morphine’’ 20mg stat.
] became unresponsive – started CPR.
Called Paramedics.
Noted VF.
Cardio [illegible] 200J
then 200J ] S.R. then
also Adrenalin 1mg IV Given Lignocaine 100mg IV
Intubated ! Ventilated’
13.41 I note that Dr Loh queried whether Mrs Overton had complained of chest pain. He
recorded that 20mg morphine had been given as a stat dose (i.e. it had not been titrated
against response).
13.42 Dr Loh then made further notes in which he recorded that Mrs Overton was not breathing
spontaneously and was on a ventilator. Her heartbeat was 90, regular and in sinus rhythm
and heart sounds were normal. There was no raised jugular venous pressure and her
chest was found to be clear on both sides. Other findings on examination were that she
had no rash or meningism. Her pupils were pinpoint and poorly reactive. She was flaccid
in all four limbs.
13.43 Dr Loh went on to make detailed notes concerning Mrs Overton’s previous medical and
social history. He noted the history of hypothyroidism, ‘asthma/bronchitis x years’ and
epilepsy that was said to be well controlled. He mentioned that there was a possible
history of angina but no family history of ischaemic heart disease. He believes that he
obtained this history from the family, whom he described as being supportive. He also
obtained information from them as to the type of regular medication that Mrs Overton was
taking for these complaints, but he did not obtain any information as to the dosage.
13.44 Dr Loh then went on to record the results of a number of clinical tests that had been
performed by himself or his colleagues. In particular, he noted that an ECG had excluded
any acute cardiac changes, that the heart was in sinus rhythm (confirming the observation
of his colleague Dr Lee) and that a chest x-ray revealed nothing abnormal. In brief,
according to his witness statement, the evidence available at that time suggested to him
that Mrs Overton had not suffered a heart attack.
291
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.45Dr Loh recorded the following provisional assessment:
‘47 yo lady
Acute Onset SOB -
cWheeze
followed with respiratory arrest?
?ppt by morphine IV
Hypoxia to cardiomyocardium
-
c VF’
13.46 In effect, his assessment was that Mrs Overton had suffered an acute attack of shortness
of breath with wheeze. An intravenous injection of morphine had then been given which
Dr Loh suspected had precipitated respiratory arrest. This had resulted in the reduction
or cessation of oxygenation to the heart muscle, leading in turn to ventricular fibrillation.
This assessment was entirely reasonable on the basis of the information available and
was, in the event, proved to be correct.
13.47 Dr Loh then went on to deal with Mrs Overton’s future management. He recommended
that Mrs Overton should remain ventilated. He suggested that enquiries as to her regular
dosage of medication be made of her general practitioner the following day.
Transfer to the Intensive Treatment Unit
13.48 Dr Mukhopadhyay attended the casualty department at 10.40pm. She made a detailed
note as follows:
‘Attended casualty for fast bleep at 10-40P.M.
47 yrs old lady asthmatic,epileptic,
hypothyroid had an attack of asthma at
home. GP was called in. She had
ventolin nebuliser. After that (reason
unknown) 20mg of Morphine (IM or IV)
given by G.P. Patient had respiratory
arrest. When ambulance man reached
She was on [sic] ventricular fibrillation (VF)
She had D.C. Shock 200J twice.
She had adrenaline,lignocaine.
VF turned into Sinus rhythm. Endotracheal
tube was put in as she was not
breathing.
In casualty ventilation with
100% O2 done. Naloxone 400mg given I.V.
Patient is completely sedated. NO response
(Dr. Wright was informed. Advised
to keep on ventilator for to-night.)
O/E: P-100/min (R)
B.P. – 96/60
Pupil – constricted (both),no reaction
to light.
292
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Lungs – No adventitious sound.
Heart – I,II,regular heart
CNS – no reflex could be elicited.
Plantar – no response’
13.49 It would appear from this extract from Dr Mukhopadhyay’s note that she saw Mrs Overton
at 10.40pm. Having briefly noted the circumstances in which Mrs Overton had been
attended and nebulised by her general practitioner, Dr Mukhopadhyay recorded that
Mrs Overton had been given 20mg morphine either intramuscularly or intravenously by
the general practitioner. She stated that the reason for his doing so was unknown. She
made no mention of chest pain. She then described the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s
resuscitation.
13.50 Dr Mukhopadhyay knew that Mrs Overton would have to be admitted to the ITU. Before
this could be done, however, she had to obtain permission from the ITU consultant
anaesthetist on call, Dr John Wright. His name appears in this note. Dr Mukhopadhyay
duly telephoned Dr Wright at home. There is an issue between them as to what was said.
I will address this issue shortly.
13.51 Having described her findings on examination of Mrs Overton, Dr Mukhopadhyay
recorded the results of the biochemical investigations that had also been noted by Dr Loh
together with certain blood gas results. Having done so, she wrote that her diagnosis was:
‘Asthmatic attack -
c Hypoxia
(potentiated -
c Morphine) leading to
VF.’
13.52 Dr Mukhopadhyay’s diagnosis was thus that Mrs Overton had suffered an asthmatic
attack with hypoxia, potentiated by morphine, and this had led to ventricular fibrillation.
Dr Mukhopadhyay did not sign her note and it is likely that she was called away before she
had time to do so. I am sure that this was a typically busy Friday evening in the casualty
department. Dr Mukhopadhyay then gave certain advice as to how Mrs Overton was to be
managed overnight, based on what she was told by Dr Wright.
13.53 According to Dr Mukhopadhyay, she not only told Dr Wright that she wanted Mrs Overton
to be admitted to the ITU but also conveyed the relevant and important parts of the history
which she had noted in Mrs Overton’s medical records, including the fact that 20mg
morphine had been given. She said that she would have done this, as it was her normal
practice. I accept that the giving of morphine would be a relevant part of the history,
particularly as the dose was very large and Dr Mukhopadhyay believed that the collapse
had been potentiated by the morphine.
13.54 Dr Wright has no recollection of the events of that evening. His belief is that he was simply
asked to authorise admission to the ITU. If the staff were busy, he would be provided only
with the essential information. I find that hard to accept. I would expect that the consultant
anaesthetist, who was in effect the ‘gatekeeper’ of the ITU, would wish to know something
of the patient’s history and any provisional diagnosis before giving permission for her to
be admitted to the ITU, which had a very limited number of beds.
293
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.55 In one of the witness statements he made to the Inquiry, Dr Wright stated:
‘Whether Dr Mukhopadhyay did or did not advise me of all the matters
recorded on the history sheet as she says,my only concern would have
been as to whether the patient needed to be ventilated or not.’
13.56 Dr Wright said in oral evidence, however, that he would have had more than one concern.
If made aware of the full circumstances, his first concern would have been to arrange
treatment and his second concern would have been to investigate the circumstances of
the overdose. He said that to give 20mg morphine would have been ‘ludicrous’, ‘a gross
overdose’ and he would have followed up the suggestion that such a dose had been given
by asking further questions of Dr Mukhopadhyay. If the information had been confirmed
by her, he would have considered trying to contact Shipman and would have made it his
‘business’ to raise it with Dr Husaini or Dr Brown. He recollects no such discussion with
either colleague. I am sure that none in fact took place. I am unconvinced by Dr Wright’s
claim. He had very limited responsibility for Mrs Overton. By the following morning,
Dr Murtaza Husain Husaini, a consultant cardiologist and a joint director of the ITU, would
be on duty and would become responsible for Mrs Overton’s care. Dr Geraint Ceri Stewart
Brown, a consultant anaesthetist and also joint director of the ITU, was to come on duty
and assume joint care of Mrs Overton with Dr Husaini on the following Monday. There was
no urgency that night to investigate the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse. I find it
hard to believe that Dr Wright would have been so extremely conscientious that he would
have made enquiries that could quite easily and more appropriately be carried out by
others over the following days.
13.57 On balance, I think it likely that Dr Mukhopadhyay did mention the relevant and important
parts of the history, including the fact that 20mg morphine had been given and that she
thought this had caused or contributed to the collapse. However, I also think it likely that
the significance of what he was told did not register with Dr Wright. This may well have
been because his main concern was with the immediate future management of a patient
who was admitted, not under his care, but under the care of consultant colleagues who
were very shortly to be directly involved in the management of the patient. I am not critical
of Dr Wright for failing to act upon the information he received about Mrs Overton. He was
never directly responsible for her care and he knew that other consultants would soon be
fully aware of what had happened.
13.58 At about 11pm, Mrs Overton was admitted to the ITU. A nursing note made by Nurse
Susan Millward records as follows:
‘Emergency admission via A!E.
Called emergency GP this evening
Extremely breathless. Had nebs # 2.
daughter says felt easier. GP says Renate
c/o chest pain Morphine 20 mg given
IV. Paramedics arrived...
... On arrival to A ! E Unconscious
pupils fixed and pin point ...
... Sinus rhythm 68 bpm. Temp 33C axilla ...’
294
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
13.59 These notes support the inference I have drawn that Shipman had been in contact with
the hospital and had said that he had given 20mg morphine. They also mention, amongst
other things, the appearance of Mrs Overton’s pupils and her body temperature, matters
to which I will refer again shortly.
The Involvement of Mrs Overton’s Family
13.60 Having been contacted by their granddaughter, Mrs Overton’s parents contacted their
son, Mrs Overton’s younger brother, Dr Michael Overton, who was a general practitioner.
Dr Overton lived quite close to Hyde, although his practice was in Gorton, near to the
centre of Manchester. In 1994, he had been fully qualified as a doctor for about 13 years
and had started in general practice in August 1984. He came to Tameside General
Hospital on the evening of 18th February. The family was told of the seriousness of
Mrs Overton’s condition. Mrs Carrington and Dr Overton recalled that there was some
discussion that night about turning off Mrs Overton’s life support system and the fact that
her collapse appeared to have been caused by the inappropriate administration of
morphine. I am satisfied that no such discussions took place that night, although they
undoubtedly took place later.
Saturday,19th February 1994
Mrs Overton Is Assessed by Dr Premraj
13.61 On the morning of Saturday, 19th February 1994, Mrs Overton suffered a number of grand
mal seizures, which were brought under control by epileptic medication. Mrs Overton was
seen at about 10.30am by Dr Kamudini Premraj, a registrar in anaesthetics working under
Dr Brown. She made several entries in the notes and records over the weekend and on
the following Monday, 21st February. The relevant parts of her clinical note read as follows:
‘47 year old lady. Admitted last night. Known Asthmatic.
Severe asthmatic attack. –Recieved [sic] ventolin
nebuliser and morphine 20mg ?IM or IV given by GP
Resp. arrest thereafter. Resuscitated by GP
until arrival of ambulance crew.
Seems to have had a cardiac arrest too
as there was no output without cardiac
massage ...
... As this lady seems to have been hypoxic
prior to arrest and for ? how long after’
She needs to be ventilated for 24-48 hours’
13.62 Dr Premraj told the Inquiry that she has no recollection of her involvement. However, she
accepted that it was obvious that the 20mg morphine had caused the respiratory arrest
and that it must also have been obvious that to give 20mg morphine was excessive and
a mistake by whoever had given it. Her note makes no reference to chest pain. She would
have discussed the sequence of events with Dr Husaini when he came on duty.
295
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Mrs Overton Is Seen by Dr Husaini
13.63 Mrs Overton was seen, later that day, for the first time by the consultant cardiologist under
whom she was to remain until her death, Dr Husaini. As I have already said, during
Mrs Overton’s stay in the unit (until 1st March 1994, when she was transferred to ward 17),
he and his consultant anaesthetist colleague and fellow ITU director, Dr Brown, were
jointly responsible for her care.
13.64 Dr Simon Rushton was Dr Husaini’s SHO, a position he had held since his transfer to ward
17 from the casualty department earlier that month. He accompanied Dr Husaini on his
ward round that day and was thereafter intermittently involved in Mrs Overton’s treatment
on ward 17. Dr Rushton told the Inquiry that he had no recollection of his initial reaction to
the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse, although he explained that he would have
read the notes and would have been aware that the giving of 20mg morphine in the
circumstances noted would be wholly wrong. Had he thought that his consultant was
unaware of the problem, he would have reported the circumstances to him. Dr Rushton
knew, however, that Dr Husaini knew of the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse and
so the need to report did not arise, so far as he was concerned.
13.65In evidence, Dr Husaini said that he realised from the hospital notes made by the junior
staff that Mrs Overton had suffered a respiratory arrest resulting from the administration of
morphine by her general practitioner. Basing his opinion on the facts as then known to him,
this mechanism of injury was logical. On his ‘post-take’ ward round, when he saw the
recently admitted patients, Dr Husaini made the following brief entry in the clinical notes:
‘- Respiratory arrest
-known epileptic
-known asthmatic?
-known alcoholism.’
13.66 Dr Husaini explained that he did not mention ischaemic heart disease because he did not
think that there was anything wrong with Mrs Overton’s heart. He based this opinion on the
clinical findings that the ECG results were normal, heart sounds were normal, there was
no evidence of cardiac failure and the lungs were clear. He considered that the
administration of morphine to an asthmatic patient was wrong; he would not do it under
any circumstances. He knew that 20mg morphine would be a grossly excessive dose and
that, in whatever dosage it was given, it should always be titrated against the patient’s
response. Dr Husaini said that he was distressed to realise that a fellow doctor had caused
Mrs Overton to be in this terrible condition. At an early stage, according to his evidence,
he resolved to ensure that his concerns were conveyed to the authorities. However, I note
that Dr Husaini did not anywhere record his opinion that 20mg morphine administered
intravenously in a bolus dose was grossly excessive and nor did he record his intention to
convey his concerns to the authorities.
The Involvement of Dr Brown
Dr Brown Sees Mrs Overton
13.67 Dr Brown was on holiday at the time of Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital and returned
to work on Monday, 21st February. From that day until her transfer to ward 17 on 1st March
296
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
1994, Dr Brown shared responsibility for Mrs Overton’s care with Dr Husaini. During her
stay in the ITU, it became increasingly clear that Mrs Overton’s prognosis was
extremely poor.
13.68 Dr Chithambaram Veerappan was in a staff or ‘middle’ grade position, responsible to
Dr Brown. He saw Mrs Overton with Dr Brown on 21st February and on several occasions
thereafter until her transfer to ward 17. He realised that an excessive dose of morphine
given in an inappropriate way had caused Mrs Overton’s collapse and he told the
Inquiry that he would probably have discussed this with Dr Brown and some of the nursing
staff.
13.69 Dr Brown told the Inquiry that, although the clinical notes suggested that Mrs Overton’s
collapse had been caused by the administration of morphine, he was not by any means
convinced that morphine was the cause of her collapse or that the dosage given was as
high as had been recorded. Dr Brown said that he thought the history recorded in the
notes was confusing; there were a number of inconsistencies in the accounts given. These
led him to consider that Mrs Overton’s condition had not been properly understood.
Dr Brown relied on a number of factors.
The Ambulance Patient Report Form
13.70 According to Dr Brown, the PRF (as well as Dr Lee’s notes) left it unclear why adrenaline
was given by the paramedics if there was a sinus rhythm. In fact, it was given, as it often
is, to treat EMD. I accept that this was not apparent from the top copy of the form left at the
hospital but I cannot accept that Dr Brown regarded it as important at the time, if indeed
he considered it at all. Certainly, he did not suggest that the mention of adrenaline implied,
for example, that morphine had not been given in the dosage suggested.
13.71 Dr Brown also said that he could not understand why the pulse was said to be
spontaneous. As I have said, Mr Harrop explained that he meant that the heart was
‘beating on its own with no longer having to do cardiac compressions’, a meaning which
I accept as reflecting a normal and natural meaning of those words and a meaning
accepted as legitimate by Dr Brown. Dr Brown pointed out that the PRF does not indicate
what was the cause of the cardiac arrest. This is so, but I would not necessarily expect
paramedics to be able to provide such information unless they were told by a doctor. In
any event, I do not accept that Dr Brown regarded this as important and I reject the
suggestion that these matters had any effect on his thinking.
Dr Lee’s Note
13.72 In evidence, Dr Brown said that the notes made by Dr Lee suggested that the cause of the
collapse was Mrs Overton’s asthma with ‘possibly a significant contribution from a
pre-existing heart problem ... sufficient to have possibly given the patient an MI in the
past’. Dr Brown knew the results of all the tests carried out on Mrs Overton’s heart and
should have known that his consultant cardiologist colleague thought there was nothing
wrong with Mrs Overton’s heart. However, I accept that a cardiac event could not be
excluded.
297
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.73 The same notes recorded the giving of 20mg morphine, which Dr Brown accepted was a
grossly excessive dose. He said in evidence: ‘20mg morphine is a grossly excessive dose
of morphine to give to somebody who has an asthmatic attack. In fact, one should
probably not give it in an asthmatic attack. But if you have chest pain, 20mg is certainly
far too much. It should be given in small doses incrementally.’
Dr Loh’s Note
13.74 Dr Brown knew of Dr Loh’s note and provisional assessment of Mrs Overton’s condition.
His reaction was to dismiss the content of this note as revealing only that Mrs Overton:
‘... had had a degree of pathology which was associated with the respiratory arrest with a
possibility of it having been precipitated by morphine intravenously but no indication of
when the morphine was given in relation to the respiratory arrest’.
13.75In support of the contention that Mrs Overton had had a heart problem, Dr Brown noted
that, in addition to Dr Loh’s note, ‘? chest pain’, a high blood sugar level had been found
and this might suggest that Mrs Overton was suffering from diabetes mellitus, which is
often associated with ischaemic heart disease. Dr Brown contended that the absence of
signs of a heart attack on the ECG did not exclude the possibility of chest pain resulting
from ischaemic heart disease. I have said that I accept that the possibility of a cardiac
problem could not be completely excluded.
13.76 Dr Brown also mentioned that Dr Loh had recorded that Mrs Overton’s chest was clear;
this suggested that there was no ongoing asthma and cast doubt on the cause of the initial
complaint. In fact, if Mrs Overton had not had an asthma attack at all but had complained
of chest pain, morphine would have been appropriate treatment, but there would still be
concern about the giving of 20mg morphine as a bolus dose.
Nurse Millward’s Note
13.77 Nurse Millward’s note recorded that Mrs Overton’s general practitioner said she had had
chest pain and had been given 20mg morphine. It also recorded that on arrival at the
hospital, Mrs Overton had been unconscious and her pupils fixed and pinpoint. Dr Brown
said that this last observation suggested to him that morphine had been given, although
the fact that she had obviously also suffered some hypoxic brain injury made it more
difficult to say that the morphine was the cause of the pinpoint pupils.
13.78 Dr Brown postulated that the mechanism of the hypoxic brain injury might have been the
slowing of her metabolic rate. He suggested that the low body temperature recorded (33
degrees C) might indicate the possible presence of some other pathological process and,
if this was not asthma or ischaemic heart disease, ‘the probability was a hypothyroidism
leading to a decreased basal metabolic rate’. By 5.30am next day, Mrs Overton’s body
temperature was restored nearly to normal by giving her extra blankets. In the presence
of the other more obvious explanation for the collapse suggested by Dr Loh and
Dr Mukhopadhyay, I do not believe that Dr Brown ever seriously considered that a
decrease in metabolic rate had caused Mrs Overton’s collapse.
298
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Dr Mukhopadhyay’s Note
13.79 Dr Mukhopadhyay had noted that there were no adventitious sounds in the lungs when
she examined Mrs Overton at about 10.40pm. To Dr Brown, this suggested that
Mrs Overton might not have had an asthma attack. However, I do not think anyone could
attach much weight to this argument, as, if the asthma had been stabilised by the use of
a nebuliser, one would not expect to hear sounds two hours later.
Dr Brown Accepts that the Likely Cause of the Arrest Was a Combination of Asthma,Chest
Pain and the Giving of Morphine
13.80 Despite the inconsistencies referred to, Dr Brown accepted in evidence that the view of
Dr Loh and Dr Mukhopadhyay, that Mrs Overton had suffered a respiratory arrest
precipitated by the administration of morphine, was sensible and was justifiable on the
basis of the evidence available. He also accepted that the administration of morphine had
played a part in Mrs Overton’s collapse; in oral evidence, he said the most likely cause of
the arrest was a combination of asthma, chest pain and the giving of morphine.
Dr Brown’s Understanding as to the Dose of Morphine Given
13.81 Dr Brown said in evidence that he doubted the accuracy of the entries recording that
20mg morphine had been given. The dose was so large that he could not accept that it
had been given. He said that he thought 20mg must have been a mistake, and that
possibly 2mg, 5mg or 10 mg had been given. At the Inquiry, he was asked what steps he
had taken to verify the information that the dose had been 20mg. He agreed that he had
taken no steps. He said that he had in mind, at the time, that there was no good evidence
as to the dose but that enquiry of, for example, Dr Lee would have produced only hearsay
evidence, which would not have been good enough. I cannot accept that Dr Brown did go
through this thought process, weighing up the potential value of such evidence, without
taking any steps to establish how reliable the evidence was as to dosage. Enquiry of staff
in the casualty department would have allowed him to ascertain where the information had
come from. He might well have been able to speak to the person who had spoken to
Shipman and to assess how confident that person was that Shipman had said that the
dose was 20mg.
13.82 Dr Brown claimed that he had thought of telephoning Shipman to ask him what dose of
morphine had been given but had decided against it. He said that he had it in mind that,
even if Shipman were to admit having given 20mg morphine, and even if Dr Brown were
to make a written note of this, Shipman could always later deny what he had said. I am
afraid that I wholly reject Dr Brown’s suggestion that these factors operated on his mind
at all at that time.
13.83 I observe finally on this issue that the evidence suggesting that 20mg morphine had been
given is consistently recorded throughout the notes, which mention no other dosage
(except that Dr John Peters, who was Dr Husaini’s registrar, once referred to diamorphine
rather than morphine having been given).
299
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.84 If Dr Brown had been in doubt about the accuracy of the information within the notes, I
would have expected him to discuss his doubts with Dr Husaini, who did not apparently
share them. He did not do so. If his doubts persisted, I would have expected Dr Brown to
try to find out who in the casualty department had supposedly received information from
Shipman about the dosage. He did not make this attempt. If he were still unsatisfied, I
would have expected him to speak to Shipman. If he were in genuine doubt about the dose
given, it would be important to find out the true dose and to give Shipman the opportunity
to correct the misapprehension that was current in the hospital.
13.85I can accept that Dr Brown might have hesitated to do that because he might have thought
that Shipman would have a motive to understate the dose. I also accept that, with the
benefit of hindsight, we know that Shipman would almost certainly have lied to Dr Brown.
But the fact that Dr Brown did not voice his doubts or make any of the enquiries I have
mentioned suggests to me that he was not then in the state of doubt that he now claims
he was in. It appeared to me that, at this stage of his evidence, Dr Brown was ‘clutching
at straws’ in his attempts to justify his supposed doubts about the history and the cause
of Mrs Overton’s collapse. However, the evidence which satisfied me completely that
Dr Brown never thought that the dose had been mistakenly recorded and had never
doubted that morphine was the cause of that collapse was the content of his police
statement.
Dr Brown’s Police Statement
13.86 After Shipman’s arrest but before his conviction, the police were investigating
Mrs Overton’s death. Dr Brown was asked to provide a statement. Before doing so, on 9th
March 1999, Dr Brown telephoned the Medical Defence Union (MDU) for advice.
Dr Brown explained that Mrs Overton was thought to have collapsed following a possible
asthma attack or myocardial infarction. She had then been nebulised and given morphine
by her general practitioner, following which she had gone into cardiac arrest. She had
been taken to hospital where she had survived in a persistent vegetative state. Dr Brown
went on to explain that he would be critical of the dose of morphine given and wanted to
know whether he needed to instruct his own solicitor. He was told that he did not.
13.87 On 15th March, Dr Brown wrote to the MDU, enclosing the statement that he proposed to
send to the Greater Manchester Police (GMP). He said that he would particularly welcome
advice from the MDU on his concluding comments in which he stated his opinion as to the
actions of another doctor. That statement was approved by the MDU. The advice given to
Dr Brown was that, so long as his concluding comments amounted to ‘fair comment’,
they could reasonably remain in the statement.
13.88 The statement contains a clear and concise narrative of the circumstances surrounding
Mrs Overton’s collapse and admission to hospital. It also contains logical and unequivocal
criticism of the treatment given by Shipman, unqualified by any of the reservations
Dr Brown was later to say he had felt about the accuracy of the information contained in
the hospital records. Dr Brown wrote:
‘If the initial diagnosis of an asthmatic attack was correct,it was treated
appropriately with the nebulisers. Intravenous Morphine plays no part in
300
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the management of patients with asthma outside the hospital. There is a
statement in the notes by the admitting physician that she may have had
chest pain,although this contradicts the clear statement of the casualty
officer that she had no chest pain prior to her collapse. While
intravenous Morphine has a place in the management of acute
myocardial infarction (heart attack) I have always understood that it
should be given intravenously,in small amounts,with time between
doses to assess the affect [sic] of the drug. In addition,it would be
essential to monitor the heart rate and blood pressure of the patient in
order to detect any signs of a cardiovascular collapse. In my experience
of managing patients who have developed wheeze following a heart
attack,I have never seen a dose of 20mg of Morphine used. I should add
that I am familiar with the administration and effects of Morphine
because in my work as an anaesthetist I regularly administer Morphine
intravenously to patients undergoing surgery. I am also familiar with the
use of Morphine post-operatively in patient controlled analgesia pumps
and it is common for these pumps only to allow 1mg of Morphine to be
given at a time with five minutes elapsing between doses of Morphine.’
His considered opinion was expressed as follows:
‘It was my opinion at the time that the patient’s initial management by the
general practitioner was highly unusual even dangerous.’
13.89 I cannot believe that Dr Brown would have made such a statement to the police if he had
harboured any doubts about the dose of morphine Shipman had given or the cause of
Mrs Overton’s collapse. It is quite clear that he is describing there what had been his
opinion at the time when he was treating Mrs Overton, and not any opinion informed by
later events, such as Shipman’s arrest. I am satisfied that, in common with many other
hospital staff, Dr Brown believed in 1994 that Mrs Overton’s collapse had been caused by
the highly unusual and dangerous administration of a bolus dose of 20mg morphine.
Dr Brown Speaks to Mrs Overton’s Family
13.90 Dr Brown recalled that his first conversation with Mrs Overton’s family took place on 21st
February and I am sure this is correct. He said that he thought it important for him to speak
to the family to see what they knew about the prognosis. He told them that it was grim. An
entry in the nursing notes for that day confirms that such a discussion took place:
‘Parents and daughter interviewed
by Dr Brown and given poorest possible
prognosis. No further visitors since.’
13.91 Dr Brown had learned earlier that day that Mrs Overton’s brother was a general
practitioner. That evening, he spoke to Dr Overton alone. Again, an entry in the nursing
notes confirms that such a discussion took place. Dr Brown told the Inquiry that he spoke
to Dr Overton as he wanted to raise his concerns about the fact that Mrs Overton had been
given morphine, which would not normally be given to an asthmatic. When asked by his
301
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
own counsel what had been his purpose in speaking to Dr Overton, he replied: ‘To tell
Dr Overton that as well as the bleak prognosis that his sister had, that a dose of morphine
had been administered by the general practitioner and for him to consider whether he felt
the matter should be taken further.’ Dr Brown said that, had Dr Overton not been medically
qualified, he would have told the family that the matter had to be taken further but that –
out of respect for his professional colleague – he could not, in Dr Overton’s case, be so
‘directive’.
13.92 Dr Overton recalled that his conversation with Dr Brown took place on the evening of 18th
February. I am sure he is mistaken, as he accepted may well be the case. Dr Overton
agreed that Dr Brown told him that his sister had been given morphine and that she was
known to be an asthmatic. Dr Overton’s recollection was that Dr Brown asked him whether
he understood the significance of what he was being told. Dr Overton said that he did. He
realised that morphine should not usually be given to an asthmatic patient. He also
realised that Dr Brown was giving him this information so that he and the rest of the family
could consider whether or not to take any further steps. Dr Brown and Dr Overton agreed
that Dr Brown did not tell Dr Overton either that the dosage given was 20mg or that it had
been given as a bolus dose. Dr Overton learned this important further information only
when supplied with the relevant papers by this Inquiry. This is a very surprising and
disturbing omission on the part of Dr Brown.
13.93 There are two reasons why I find this omission disturbing. First, there is a world of
difference between the information given to Dr Overton and the picture as Dr Brown knew
it to be. It might well be understandable for a doctor, in the heat of the moment, to give a
small titrated dose of morphine to an asthmatic who began to complain of chest pain. But
the administration of a 20mg bolus dose could not be so readily understood. If Dr Brown
had been in genuine doubt about the dose given and had genuinely had in mind that
further enquiry of Shipman or the person at the hospital who had spoken to him would be
fruitless, he should at least have given Dr Overton the option of having the information
clarified. Second, although Dr Brown said that his intention was to alert Dr Overton to the
possibility of making a complaint, I am not convinced that is correct or, at least, that it tells
the whole story. Dr Brown must have expected that Mrs Overton’s brother, being a doctor,
would be bound to ask what had caused the collapse. In speaking to Dr Overton,
Dr Brown was supplying some of the information that Dr Overton would be expected to
seek. However, Dr Brown must have recognised that, by giving only part of the picture,
and presenting it in a relatively innocuous way, there was a very real danger that
Dr Overton might be put off further enquiry.
13.94 Dr Overton was about nine years younger than his sister. They were not close. They saw
one another every month or two, at Christmas and on family occasions. I formed the
impression that Dr Overton probably thought that his sister would have been a very
demanding patient for Shipman to have on his list. In a statement he made to the Inquiry,
he described her as a ‘heartsink’ patient, meaning that she was the kind of patient who
would cause her doctor’s heart to sink when she attended for an appointment. He
confirmed to me, however, that Mrs Overton shared the widely held view that Shipman was
an excellent doctor. She had nothing but praise for him. Dr Overton told me that he knew
that Shipman also enjoyed a good professional reputation locally.
302
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
13.95Dr Overton explained to his family that there was the possibility of bringing a claim against
Shipman. He had, as I have said, only incomplete information. His understanding was that
his sister had developed chest pains after being successfully treated for an asthma attack.
He believed that Shipman had thought these pains were cardiac in origin. He felt that
Shipman had made an honest mistake in stressful, chaotic circumstances. He did not
believe that the mistake had arisen from lack of knowledge. In oral evidence, he said:
‘Morphine can certainly be used for cardiac pain. So in that way it would not have been a
surprise that he may have felt it necessary to give it her but unfortunately with the asthma
it is not appropriate ... I realise that it is not considered normal practice. In the heat of the
moment in an emergency situation, I felt he would have made a clinical judgement – not
a judgement I would have made but that is how it seemed at the time, that he made that
clinical judgement.’
13.96 The family decided that they did not wish to pursue any complaint or claim. They trusted
Shipman and believed that he had made a genuine mistake. Mrs Carrington was also a
patient of Shipman and she held him in very high regard because of the way in which he
had cared for her. Mrs Overton’s parents were strongly opposed to the idea of making any
complaint or claim. This was obviously an extremely distressing time for the family. I
entirely understand the decision not to take things further, especially as it was founded on
the incomplete information provided by Dr Brown.
13.97 Dr Overton can have had no reason to doubt the accuracy of the information he had been
given. Dr Brown had ostensibly made a special effort to ensure that the family was
informed of his concern over the administration of morphine and Dr Overton could not
have suspected that important information was being withheld. Unless told otherwise, his
expectation would be that the morphine had been administered in the usual way and in
the usual dose. When asked at the Inquiry what the decision of the family would have been
if he had been told that Shipman had given 20mg morphine as a bolus dose, Dr Overton
thought that this might have altered the course that the family decided to take. He
emphasised, however, that his father was vehemently opposed to any complaint being
made. It seems to me that, if all the relevant information had been furnished by Dr Brown
and if Dr Brown had expressed his view that the declared dosage, if given, was ‘highly
unusual even dangerous’, Dr Overton would have been very shocked and would
probably have advised the family to make a complaint. I can understand that he would
wish to protect his parents and niece from further distress but I think he would have felt it
right to take some action.
13.98 On the afternoon of Friday, 25th February, Dr Overton and Dr Brown spoke again. The
nursing notes record a conversation in which Dr Brown is said to have informed
Dr Overton of the lack of progress and the bleak prognosis. Dr Brown recalls that it was
on this occasion that he was told that the family did not want to take the matter further and
Dr Overton accepted that this might have been the case. There is no doubt that Dr Overton
told Dr Brown of the family’s decision. The timing is not important. I am satisfied that, by
about 25th February, Dr Brown knew that, if any concerns about Shipman’s treatment of
Mrs Overton were to be pursued at all, the initiative would have to come from the senior
staff at the hospital, in effect, himself, Dr Husaini or both.
303
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Dr Brown Decides to Take No Further Action
13.99 Dr Brown told the Inquiry that he was informed that the family did not want to take the
matter further because Shipman was a good doctor, a judgement which Dr Brown had no
reason to doubt. He said that he felt that, without the support of the family, he could not
initiate the enquiries necessary to gain more evidence of the quantity of morphine given.
He said that the first step he would have taken would have been to obtain a letter of referral
from Shipman, something which, if Shipman refused, he could not have insisted upon
without the authority of the family. I am wholly unpersuaded by this piece of evidence. In
my view, if Dr Brown had wished to put Dr Overton in the picture so that he could consider
what, if any, steps the family should take, the first thing he would have wished to tell
Dr Overton was that it appeared that Shipman had given a bolus dose of 20mg morphine.
If Dr Brown had felt that this required verification, he would have explained that to
Dr Overton. That Dr Brown did not do so persuades me that he did not intend to enable
the family to make an informed choice as to how to proceed.
13.100 Dr Brown said that he decided that it would not be appropriate for him to initiate any
complaint against Shipman or precipitate any investigation of Shipman’s treatment of
Mrs Overton. He advanced several reasons for this decision. It is only fair that, before
giving my final view about these reasons, I should know more about what, in terms of
reporting concerns, was generally regarded as appropriate at that time. The Inquiry will
hear evidence about these matters in late 2003 and I shall address them in my final Report.
13.101 Dr Brown’s first reason was that he felt he ought to honour the family’s wish that no
complaint should be made about Shipman. He said that, in such circumstances, as with
situations where important decisions about treatment are made, the wishes of the family
must be paramount. I accept that in decisions about whether a complaint is to be made,
the patient or the patient’s family have an important voice. However, my provisional view
is that, where there is a possible danger that the apparent error made by a doctor might
be repeated and harm other patients, the safety of other patients must override the wish
of the family to do nothing.
13.102 Second, Dr Brown said that he was unaware of any local procedure or mechanism that
would have enabled him to pursue a complaint against a general practitioner. He
believed, correctly, that it would not be appropriate to do this through the ‘Three Wise Men’
procedure, which was available only to investigate concerns about hospital doctors. In
fact, there was a procedure available by which a complaint against Shipman could have
been pursued. If a report had been made to the local Family Health Services Authority, it
could have referred the report to the local Medical Services Committee, which could
investigate and hold a hearing. The simplest way for a doctor in Dr Brown’s position to
initiate this procedure would have been to inform either the Chief Executive designate or
the Medical Director designate of the Trust which was to be responsible for running
Tameside General Hospital, and which was due to come into being on 1st April 1994.
13.103 Third, Dr Brown said that he believed that the only route to follow was to make an individual
complaint to the General Medical Council (GMC). He did not think that he had sufficient
information to found such a complaint. He was concerned to strike the correct balance
between the need to report a colleague’s misconduct or mistake and the need to avoid
304
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
making false accusations against a colleague, and was worried that he might, by pursuing
the complaint, be considered by the GMC to be acting improperly. In a supplemental
statement made by Dr Brown, he said:
‘In general I would not consider making an allegation of malpractice
against another doctor unless the evidence was based on direct
observation of behaviour or supported by clinical measurements.’
13.104 Dr Brown told the Inquiry that professional etiquette had a bearing on his decision not to
pursue the matter further. He said that, as part of doctors’ training, they are told to be very
reluctant to criticise other doctors or to pass opinions on them. In fact, when doctors not
involved in the treatment of a patient are asked about that treatment by patients or others
who are concerned, it is usual for them to say, ‘I am sorry, I cannot say anything. I was not
there to judge.’ I accept that Dr Brown was genuinely influenced by this consideration. His
decision to telephone the MDU for advice before giving the police a statement about
Mrs Overton confirms that, as recently as 1999, he was hesitant about criticising a fellow
practitioner, even one who had been arrested for murder.
13.105Fourth, as to raising his concerns with the Chief Executive or any other individual or body,
Dr Brown claimed that he knew that, before making any allegations, he had to have firm
evidence and he considered that the clinical notes were insufficient for this purpose. I shall
consider Dr Brown’s position further, later in this Chapter and will now continue my
account of Mrs Overton’s history.
Mrs Overton’s Transfer to Ward 17
13.106 Mrs Overton’s condition did not alter significantly during her stay in the ITU but it was
possible to wean her from the ventilator on 27th February. She was transferred to ward 17
on 1st March. The prognosis remained very poor. I am satisfied that, by this time, it was
common knowledge in the ITU, and was soon to become common knowledge on ward 17,
that the reason for Mrs Overton’s collapse was that she had been given an overdose of
morphine by her general practitioner.
The Issue of Withdrawal of Treatment
13.107 Some time before her collapse, Mrs Overton had told her daughter that, if ever she were
to be in a vegetative state, she would not wish her life to be prolonged by artificial means.
The two women had been discussing the case of Mr Anthony Bland, the Hillsborough
victim. Mr Bland’s parents had sought the permission of the High Court to withdraw
life-sustaining treatment from their son, who was in a persistent vegetative state and the
case was much in the news in the early 1990s. The case was heard in the Family Division
of the High Court in November 1992 and in the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords in
December 1992. Their Lordships’ opinions were delivered on 4th February 1993.
13.108 In the light of this expressed wish, and provided they were satisfied that Mrs Overton’s
prognosis was hopeless, her close relations had no desire for her life in a vegetative state
to be prolonged by medical intervention.
305
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.109 On 3rd March, Dr Peters, Dr Husaini’s registrar, was involved in a discussion with the
family, in the course of which they communicated their views to him. Dr Peters made a note
of their wishes in the hospital records and decided that he should discuss the matter with
Dr Husaini.
13.110 That discussion with Dr Husaini apparently took place at 3.30pm on Friday, 4th March.
Dr Husaini agreed that Mrs Overton should not be resuscitated in the event that she
stopped breathing. She was to continue with full nursing and medical care, at least until
Dr Husaini had reviewed the latest electroencephalograph (EEG), which was not at that
time available. Dr Peters made a note of this discussion.
Dr Husaini Contacts the Coroner
13.111 Three days later, on Monday, 7th March, Dr Husaini contacted the Coroner for Greater
Manchester South, then Mr Peter Revington. According to Dr Husaini, he was seeking
advice on two issues. First, he was concerned that Shipman had given morphine, which
had caused a respiratory arrest and brain death, and that its administration had been a
mistake. He wanted advice from Mr Revington about how he should pursue his concerns.
Second, he wanted to know whether the withdrawal of treatment was legally possible.
13.112 I am unable to accept that Dr Husaini sought advice from the Coroner about his concerns
over the administration of morphine. The evidence suggests irresistibly that his only
purpose was to seek advice about Mrs Overton’s future management. There are a number
of reasons for this conclusion.
13.113 First, in Dr Husaini’s clinical note of 7th March, there is no reference to his concerns about
Shipman’s treatment. On the contrary, the note deals explicitly and exclusively with future
treatment issues noted by Dr Peters on 3rd and 4th March. The note reads:
‘Mr Rivington [sic] Coroner consulted.
He says that the patient is not legally dead c
do not [illegible] withhold food
or antibiotics or any
other medical or nursing treatment required
SEEK COURT ORDER IF
WE WISH.’
The advice from Mr Revington in connection with the seeking of a court order can have
referred only to an application to withdraw life-sustaining treatment.
13.114 Second, the nursing note for 7th March records that the EEG report had been received and
revealed no cerebral activity. It continued to the effect that, after review of the EEG,
Dr Husaini had contacted the Coroner ‘re: further management’ and made no mention
of any expression of concern.
13.115Third, the timing of the contact with the Coroner points towards its having been prompted
by the recent discussion about the withdrawal of treatment.
13.116 Fourth, the Coroner would have been an improbable person to contact for advice about
how to pursue concerns about treatment. As I have already suggested, one obvious first
306
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
port of call would have been someone within the hospital administration, such as the Chief
Executive designate, Mr Roger Butterworth.
13.117 Finally, when Dr Husaini wrote to his defence body following Shipman’s arrest, asking how
he should respond to a request by the police for a statement, he did not suggest that he
spoke to the Coroner about the concerns he had but wrote:
‘I did speak to the Coroner regarding ... withholding treatment.’
13.118 After speaking with the Coroner, Dr Husaini spoke to Mr Butterworth later that same day.
Dr Husaini’s Contact with Mr Butterworth,Mrs Nuttall and Mr Howorth
13.119 Dr Husaini told the Inquiry that, when speaking with Mr Butterworth that day, he informed
him of the two issues he had raised with the Coroner. His evidence as to the concern he
expressed about the treatment given was inconsistent. At one stage in his evidence, he
said that he told Mr Butterworth that the treatment given had been incorrect but, at other
times, he explained that he had not said that he thought the general practitioner was to
blame because he did not want to pass judgement on his conduct in that way. He said that
he contemplated that there would be a meeting about the issue of treatment by the general
practitioner, attended by those members of the hospital staff who had understood that
morphine had been given. According to Dr Husaini, Mr Butterworth said he would ask
Mrs Lynn Nuttall, the Hospital’s Business Manager, to contact Dr Husaini.
13.120 In evidence, Mr Butterworth denied that Dr Husaini had mentioned the circumstances in
which the collapse had occurred. I accept his evidence. Again, I rely on a note made by
Dr Husaini at the time, the emphasis of which is the same as the emphasis of the note of
his contact with the Coroner. It makes no mention of concerns about past treatment but
focusses on withdrawal of treatment issues. It reads as follows:
‘Mr Butterworth chief executive informed
Father and Mother informed
re E.E.G. flat
& will be repeated
day after tomorrow
after withdrawal of
Epilim
We need a court order
to stop treatment.’
13.121 At some stage during the following fortnight, Mrs Nuttall also contacted Dr Husaini.
According to Dr Husaini’s oral evidence to the Inquiry, he told Mrs Nuttall also of his
concerns about the treatment given. He said: ‘... I spoke to her about what I spoke to
Mr Revington and to Mr Butterworth and that is although the patient was under my care, I
was not satisfied with all the aspects of her illness and what led to her illness as well as for
her future care.’ For her part, Mrs Nuttall says that Dr Husaini raised only one matter with
her, that of the possibility of withdrawing Mrs Overton’s treatment.
13.122 In a memorandum dated 21st March, Mrs Nuttall asked Dr Husaini to write to Mr Charles
Howorth, legal adviser to the then North West Regional Health Authority, with
307
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Mrs Overton’s full medical history and other relevant details. She did not ask him to
articulate any concerns he had about the treatment Mrs Overton had received, as I would
have expected her to do, if Dr Husaini had mentioned them to her. She informed
Dr Husaini that Mr Howorth would advise him of the steps to take and that she was
available to give further help if this was required.
13.123 The contents of this memorandum suggest strongly that Mrs Nuttall had in mind only the
future treatment of the patient and not an investigation of concerns about past treatment.
Her oral evidence was that, had Dr Husaini told her that he was concerned about
Mrs Overton’s treatment at the hands of her general practitioner, she would have
remembered it. She said that she would have returned to Mr Butterworth to convey those
concerns to him and that, as she did not do so, she cannot have been told of such
concerns. I accept her evidence and reject that of Dr Husaini.
13.124 Dr Husaini wrote to Mr Howorth on 24th March. The letter is very clear. It explicitly seeks
advice about Mrs Overton’s future management but does not even obliquely seek advice
about how Dr Husaini might pursue his concerns about past treatment. The only reference
to the administration of morphine is couched in rather reassuring terms. The suggestion
is that it might have been given for ‘restlessness’, but it does not say (as is the case) that
it would be wholly inappropriate for it to be given for that condition. There is no suggestion
in the clinical notes that morphine had been given for that reason. The letter mentions that
Mrs Overton had a history of asthma but does not say that morphine should not be given
to an asthmatic. Nor does the letter say that the dosage of morphine was dangerously high
or that it was the administration of morphine that led to the collapse. It only implies that
morphine might have been the cause by referring to the reversal of the respiratory arrest
by the giving of naloxone, the antidote to morphine. Nor did Dr Husaini state who had
given the morphine. If he intended to raise concerns, it is surprising that he did not identify
the object of his concerns.
13.125In oral evidence, Dr Husaini said that, when writing this letter, he thought that the
circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse would be investigated. He wanted to know what
he should do next and believed that Mr Howorth would take into account not only the
contents of the letter, but also the contents of the conversations that he had had with
Mr Butterworth and Mrs Nuttall.
13.126 I regret to say that I am firmly of the view that, when writing this letter, Dr Husaini did not
intend to communicate his concerns about past treatment to Mr Howorth. In evidence, he
acknowledged that his letter, looked at carefully, did not communicate his concerns. It
appears to me that Dr Husaini probably deliberately avoided mentioning his concerns. His
reference to the giving of morphine for restlessness seems designed to explain away its
administration rather than to raise any concern about it.
13.127 By 14th April, Mrs Nuttall had spoken to Mr Howorth. In a memorandum to Dr Husaini of
that date, she mentioned the case of Mr Bland and another case concerning the
withdrawal of treatment from a patient in a persistent vegetative state. Judgement in the
Bland case had been delivered in February 1993 and the other case had been heard by
the Court of Appeal in January 1994. She told Dr Husaini that she was awaiting copies of
the judgements in those cases. She would then arrange for them to meet to discuss ‘what
308
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the next steps will be’. Mrs Nuttall believes that, a short time later, she passed copies of
the court transcripts to Dr Husaini and then left matters in his hands.
13.128 The memorandum of 14th April represents yet further contemporaneous evidence that
Dr Husaini and the hospital administrators were concerned only with the issue of
withdrawal of treatment. I am satisfied that neither Mr Butterworth nor Mrs Nuttall were
ever aware of the concern that had been felt about the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s
collapse. I am also quite satisfied that Mr Howorth, who is a lawyer and not a doctor,
believed that his opinion was being sought only in connection with the question of
Mrs Overton’s future management.
13.129 On 15th April, Mr Howorth wrote a letter, responding to Dr Husaini, saying that he had
discussed the situation with Mrs Nuttall, that he had written to her with information ‘relating
to the legal position’ and suggesting that Dr Husaini liaise further with her.
13.130 Dr Husaini remembers being told that, before any application could be made to the court
for permission to withdraw treatment, the patient had to be in a persistent vegetative state
for 12 months from the time of the collapse. This is consistent with the medical evidence
in the Bland case, which was to the effect that, if a patient in such a state shows no signs
of recovery after six months, or at most a year, there is no prospect of recovery. It may be
that Dr Husaini read this in the transcripts with which he was provided. Alternatively, he
may have become aware of it following the involvement of Dr David Shepherd.
The Involvement of Dr Shepherd
13.131 Dr Shepherd was a visiting consultant neurologist to Tameside General Hospital, based
at North Manchester General Hospital. He retired on health grounds in December 1998
and was unfit to attend the Inquiry to give oral evidence. In April 1994, he was asked to
see Mrs Overton, with a view to advising on her future treatment, and he saw her on 25th
May. It is unlikely that he spoke directly to Dr Husaini about Mrs Overton. After examining
her, Dr Shepherd recorded his opinion that, three months post-collapse, the likelihood of
recovery was remote but that her persistent vegetative state or coma vigil state could not
be said to be unequivocal and, therefore, permanent until 12 months had elapsed.
According to him, Mrs Overton was not ‘brain stem dead’ because she was breathing
spontaneously.
13.132 I accept Dr Shepherd’s written evidence that he had no concerns about the
circumstances of Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital. His knowledge of morphine was
very limited; he had not prescribed it for about 30 years. The effect of a 20mg dose of
morphine would have been outside his area of expertise. His concern and the sole
purpose of his visit was to advise on Mrs Overton’s current condition and prognosis.
Mrs Overton Remains on Ward 17
13.133 Mrs Overton remained on ward 17. She received a very high standard of nursing and
medical care, although an acute medical ward, such as ward 17, was not an ideal
environment for a long-term patient. The staff became attached to her. She was a fixture
on the ward, an unconscious human presence, who nonetheless inspired affection. Her
309
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
family appreciated the treatment that Mrs Overton received at the hospital and were very
keen for her to remain there.
13.134 For much of the duration of her stay, however, there loomed on the horizon the prospect
that she would be removed to an alternative placement, in a nursing home or similar
establishment. In early May 1994, even before Dr Shepherd visited her, it was mooted that
she might be transferred to a local long-stay facility in Chadderton. Later in the year, the
possibility was raised that she might be transferred to the Royal Hospital and Home,
Putney, London. This was a specialist unit with experience of managing persistent
vegetative state patients. The family were unhappy at the prospect of a move but the
possibility remained open into the New Year.
13.135Quite apart from the fact that the family wanted Mrs Overton to stay on ward 17 because
of the high quality of care she was receiving, there was another good reason for opposition
to a move. Such a move could well have had severe financial and social consequences
for Mrs Carrington, who had paid many of her mother’s debts and had maintained the
mortgage repayments on their home. If Mrs Overton were to be transferred to a nursing
home, it appeared that charges would be payable and these would have to be defrayed
from Mrs Overton’s capital. The equity in her home represented her only capital and, if that
had to be realised, her daughter would be rendered homeless. Such a possibility was to
be avoided at all costs. Dr Overton represented the family in correspondence and
meetings with the hospital staff and sought to ensure that his sister was not transferred
from the hospital.
13.136 In early 1995, there were further discussions between the hospital and the family about
Mrs Overton’s future. An entry in the clinical records at this time recorded improved
cerebral activity; a transfer to Putney was to be reconsidered. At a meeting on 20th
January, it was decided that Dr Shepherd should be instructed again, with a view to his
advising on future management and also as to whether there were any suitable specialist
units in the North West. On 25th January, Dr Shepherd advised that Mrs Overton’s clinical
condition had not changed, although the signs on her EEG had improved. He advised that
the hospital should contact Dr Krystyna Walton, who ran a local rehabilitation unit in
Rochdale. He also mentioned the possibility of an assessment at the Royal Hospital and
Home and said that Dr Keith Andrews, who was based there, was ‘the main expert’ on
persistent vegetative state in the United Kingdom and might be able to offer some help
with regard to withdrawal of treatment.
13.137 Dr Walton is a consultant physician in rehabilitation medicine and the Head of the Floyd
Unit for Neurological Rehabilitation at Birch Hill Hospital, Rochdale. She was asked to
assess Mrs Overton’s suitability for admission to her unit and examined her on 30th
January 1995. Dr Walton’s recollection of her conversation with the nursing staff on ward
17 was that consideration was being given to withdrawal of treatment and that, since this
could not be done on the ward, the Floyd Unit was seen as a possible alternative place for
this to be done. I am satisfied this was not the intention of the medical staff and that there
was a misunderstanding between the nursing staff and Dr Walton. In any event, Dr Walton
quickly realised that Mrs Overton was not suitable for rehabilitation in her unit. She made
an entry in the notes, recommending a nursing home placement at Chadderton Total Care
310
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
(which had been discussed nine months earlier). However, Mrs Overton remained on
ward 17 and no further steps of any significance were taken with a view to her transfer.
The Weeks Leading up to Mrs Overton’s Death
13.138 I am slightly disadvantaged in describing Mrs Overton’s clinical course during the weeks
leading up to her death because no clinical records are available for the period beginning
on 7th March and ending on 20th April. I am quite satisfied that some such records must
have been made and I was for some time worried about the possible circumstances in
which they had gone astray. However, having seen and heard the evidence of those
treating Mrs Overton, having seen the nursing notes (which are available) and having read
an account of the attempts that have been made to locate the missing notes, I am satisfied
that there is no sinister explanation for their disappearance.
13.139 The evidence from the nursing notes, supported in many respects by the evidence of the
witnesses, reveals that, at the beginning of March 1995, Mrs Overton developed an
infection around the site of her gastrostomy feeding tube. This was treated with antibiotics.
She was also suffering from symptoms of acid reflux and related gastric problems. She
seemed to recover from these ailments in about the middle of March.
13.140 On 22nd March, just over 13 months after Mrs Overton’s original admission, Dr Husaini
again sought Dr Shepherd’s advice. He wanted to know whether the presence of cortical
activity in the brain excluded a diagnosis of persistent vegetative state. Dr Shepherd
advised that it did not but that an EEG suggesting that there was a response to external
stimuli would exclude such diagnosis. On 11th April, almost certainly as a result of this
advice, a further EEG was ordered, but there was some uncertainty about precisely what
was required and the EEG was cancelled on 20th April.
Mrs Overton’s Death
13.141 Early in the morning of Friday, 21st April, a nurse, Mr Michael Berrisford, was on duty on
ward 17. He remembers checking on Mrs Overton at about 5.15am and finding that she
was not breathing. He listened to her chest and heard no heartbeat. He made the
following note:
‘0515 hrs Checked to see if
alright,found Renata not
to be breathing with no
pulse. Sr on block phoned.
Dr Davies contacted. No
warnings,noises prior to this
routine check.’
13.142 Mr Berrisford called the nursing sister on duty, Sister Mariko Tazaki (now Sharples), and
the on-call doctor, Dr Jacqueline Davies (now Shaw). According to Sister Tazaki’s note,
Dr Davies attended at 6.20am and confirmed that Mrs Overton was dead. Dr Davies’ note
records that she was asked to see Mrs Overton and confirmed that she was dead, finding
311
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
neither breath sounds nor heart sounds. An entry written in the margin of the notes,
recording the time as 5.30am, was probably made by Dr Rachel Pyburn, to whose
involvement I shall turn shortly. It is unclear to what precise event this time is intended to
refer.
13.143 It is clear that Mrs Overton’s death came as a shock to those who were involved in her
care. It came as an emotional shock because they were fond of her. It also came
somewhat unexpectedly, as Mrs Overton had not been suffering any acute illness that led
those about her to believe that her death was imminent. Everyone recognised, however,
that the nature of her chronic condition was such that she might die at any time.
The Report of the Death to the Coroner
The Evidence of Dr Pyburn
13.144 Dr Pyburn graduated from Newcastle University in 1989. She is now a consultant
geriatrician at Hope Hospital, Salford. She arrived at Tameside General Hospital in July
1994 and was initially assigned to work as a medical registrar on ward 17. She left ward
17 during the same month, but returned there in February 1995.
13.145In late July 1994, just before they both left ward 17, Dr Rushton told Dr Pyburn about the
circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse and admission. Dr Pyburn told the Inquiry that
she shared Dr Rushton’s concern that the collapse had been caused by morphine being
given following an asthma attack. She was told, probably by both Dr Rushton and
Dr Husaini on her first ward round on ward 17, that the circumstances had been ‘gone into’
following Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital. She was made aware that the matter had
been discussed by Dr Brown with Mrs Overton’s family following her admission and that
one member of the family was a doctor. She could not remember being told that the matter
had been referred to the Coroner or the GMC. Nor could she remember the detail of what
Dr Husaini had said about any enquiry or investigation that had taken place. Dr Pyburn
then had no involvement with Mrs Overton until her return to ward 17 the following
February.
13.146 Dr Pyburn has no recollection of Mrs Overton’s condition in the days and weeks leading
up to her death. Whilst she was not expecting Mrs Overton to die, the death was not, in
Dr Pyburn’s words, ‘a total surprise’. She told me that she was saddened by it. Dr Pyburn
probably learned of the death at some time before 9am on 21st April. She immediately felt
that she had a responsibility to report the death to the coroner. That sense of responsibility
was also tinged by concern that the general practitioner in question (whom she did not at
that stage know by name) was bound to be affected and possibly upset by the
investigation into the death that she expected would follow. She told the Inquiry that she
believed that Mrs Overton’s case was ‘a complete tragedy’ that had resulted from ‘medical
error’. It was the circumstances of the original collapse that caused her to report the death
and not the fact that she could not confidently state what specific condition had caused
Mrs Overton to die when she did.
13.147 Dr Pyburn described personal circumstances that strengthened her resolve to ensure that
the case was properly reported. Her grandmother had died following an asthma attack
312
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
and her grandfather had believed that more might have been done at the time to save her
life. Dr Pyburn had only learned of this some years later when she became medically
qualified. Moreover, her personal experience that coroner’s officers were sometimes keen
to persuade junior doctors to suggest a natural cause of death meant that she decided
not to delegate the task of telephoning the coroner’s office.
13.148 Dr Pyburn said that she telephoned Dr Husaini to ask whether he wished to report the
death to the coroner or whether she should do so. He agreed that it should be done and
said that she should do it. She telephoned the coroner’s office in the mid-morning. There
is a sharp conflict of evidence between Dr Pyburn and Mrs Mary Evans, the coroner’s first
officer at that time, as to what was said by Dr Pyburn.
13.149 Dr Pyburn’s evidence was that her conversation with Mrs Evans lasted about ten minutes.
She told the Inquiry that she sought to explain that Mrs Overton’s respiratory arrest and
death had been caused by the giving of morphine in circumstances in which morphine
would not normally be expected to be given. However, because she had not been present
at the time of the collapse, she said that she wanted to avoid giving the impression that
she was judging the issue and she avoided using the word ‘negligence’. She said: ‘I would
have quite a clear recollection of my intentions in ringing the Coroner’s office and also in
struggling with words at various times to try and convey what had happened without using
the word ‘negligence’. I would not have wished to use the word ‘negligence’ because I had
not been present at the time and that would seem to be a judgement that somebody ought
to make after an appropriate investigation.’
13.150 Dr Pyburn said that she believed that she was quite clear in saying that there had been a
‘medical mishap’ and that she told Mrs Evans so. However, in the light of what she said in
the above extract, I doubt that Dr Pyburn used any expression as clear as that. This was
unfortunate because, as Dr Pyburn realised, Mrs Evans was not medically qualified and
could not be expected to understand the significance of the giving of morphine unless it
were spelled out to her.
13.151 Dr Pyburn said that she was sure that she had said enough to satisfy Mrs Evans that the
death ought to be investigated. She said that she did not seek to put forward any
provisional causes of death and that she never contemplated that the coroner might
‘accept’ any cause of death that she proposed. She always believed that there would have
to be an inquest.
13.152 I am puzzled by Dr Pyburn’s reluctance to mention the word ‘negligence’ or otherwise to
spell out her concerns in clear terms. She acknowledged that she felt a degree of concern
for the doctor, who was unknown to her, upon whose head she would bring trouble by
making the report. I cannot understand why, if she had decided to make a report because
of her concern about the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse, she felt unable to say
that, although she had not directly observed the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse,
the clinical notes made at the time suggested that the general practitioner had made a
serious mistake and had given a gross overdose of morphine with terrible consequences.
It may be that Dr Pyburn’s unwillingness to use clear words reflects an attitude that is
widespread among doctors, namely a reluctance to comment, even hypothetically, on the
conduct of colleagues.
313
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.153 Following her conversation with Mrs Evans, Dr Pyburn made a note in Mrs Overton’s
clinical records, as follows:
‘D/W Dr Husaini,to D/W Coroner’s Officer.
HM Coroner’s officer feels post mortem is required.
No DC [death certificate] to be issued.’
The second line of this entry suggests that Dr Pyburn might have been less determined
that the case should be fully investigated than she claimed. The words suggest either that
Dr Pyburn was enquiring of the officer whether or not an autopsy was required or that she
was actively suggesting to the officer that an autopsy was not necessary but that the
officer felt that it was. Dr Pyburn strongly denied that this was the case when it was put to
her by Senior Counsel to the Inquiry. She said that she was recording that Mrs Evans had
agreed that an autopsy was required and that a death certificate was not to be issued. I
find that assertion hard to accept, as it is not really consistent with the words used. I think
that expressions such as ‘HM Coroner’s officer agrees’ or ‘HM Coroner’s officer also feels’
would have been far more appropriate to convey what Dr Pyburn told the Inquiry was said
and would quite readily have come to her mind.
The Evidence of Dr Husaini
13.154 In his witness statement, Dr Husaini said that he agreed that Mrs Overton’s death must be
reported. This was partly because the death was sudden and of unknown cause. In oral
evidence, he said that the only reason for making the report was on account of the concern
over the administration of morphine. I am uncertain as to what was in Dr Husaini’s mind,
or even that he applied his mind to the point at the time. It is possible that he simply agreed
with Dr Pyburn’s proposal that the death should be reported and believed her to be a
suitable person to make the report. That Dr Husaini did not speak to the Coroner himself
tends to confirm my view that he had not mentioned his concerns about the circumstances
of Mrs Overton’s original collapse when he had spoken to the Coroner in March 1994. Had
he done so, I would have expected him to wish to remind the Coroner that the person to
whom he had earlier referred had now died and he remained concerned about the
circumstances of her collapse which were directly related to her death. At the very least,
I would have expected him to tell Dr Pyburn that he had explained his concerns about
Mrs Overton to the Coroner. Dr Husaini said that he told Dr Pyburn but Dr Pyburn had no
recollection of being told this.
13.155 The fact that Dr Husaini delegated to Dr Pyburn the task of reporting the death to the
Coroner casts doubt on his determination that the matter be fully investigated, as does his
subsequent inactivity when there was no inquest. Moreover, it is unlikely that he told
Dr Pyburn about the earlier referral to the Coroner. Had he done so, I think Dr Pyburn
would have mentioned it to Mrs Evans and it appears that she did not.
The Evidence of Mrs Evans
13.156 In 1995, Mrs Evans was the first coroner’s officer. She had begun working in a clerical/
typing/secretarial role in 1974. In about 1984, she had become the coroner’s second
314
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
officer and in 1985she became first officer. In giving evidence, she had no independent
recollection of her involvement in the reporting of Mrs Overton’s death but recognised her
writing on the report of the death, which must have been completed during her
conversation with Dr Pyburn. She said that the extent of her involvement was to receive the
report and then (after consultation with Mr Revington) to arrange an autopsy.
13.157 Mrs Evans’ account is necessarily a reconstruction of events based on what she recorded
at the time. She completed the heading of the form and recorded Mrs Overton’s name,
age, address and date and place of death. She then recorded, in the section described
as ‘Brief Report’:
‘Admitted 18.2.94 after a respiratory arrest.
Had been in a coma for over a year.’
This information is written in black ballpoint pen, but certain additional information,
concerning details of Mrs Overton’s next of kin (her brother) and the causes of death
I(a)–(c), are written in pencil. Mrs Evans explained that she would use the ballpoint pen to
record the account taken from Dr Pyburn. She said that she would then have changed to
pencil to record Dr Pyburn’s suggested causes of death, as these could only be
provisional, until ‘accepted’ by Mr Revington. After recording the provisional causes of
death, she would have continued to use a pencil to record the details of the next of kin. In
the ‘Cause of Death’ section, she wrote:
‘I(a) Persistent vegetative state
(b) Respiratory arrest
(c) Asthma ! morphine administration.’
13.158 According to Mrs Evans, the conversation with Dr Pyburn cannot have been as Dr Pyburn
claimed. First, it must have lasted less than ten minutes. Second, Dr Pyburn can only have
given a brief account of the death and cannot have mentioned morphine until she
provided the provisional causes of death. Third, Mrs Evans maintained that Dr Pyburn was
seeking to provide provisional causes of death, which, if Mr Revington had been prepared
to accept them, would have become the registered causes.
13.159 Mrs Evans’ evidence as to whether she had or had not been told that the morphine had
been given in inappropriate circumstances was inconsistent. In her written statement, she
seemed to suggest that she had not been told this. However, when questioned by counsel
for Dr Pyburn, she at times seemed to agree that she had. As she had no direct
recollection of this event, I infer that this evidence shows that Mrs Evans does not know
whether or not Dr Pyburn said that. Mrs Evans denied that she had been told that there
was any causal connection between any medical treatment given to Mrs Overton and her
death, even though, of course, she wrote that the underlying causes of death were
‘Asthma ! morphine administration’. Mrs Evans said that she recognised that
morphine administration was being put forward as a cause of the death and was not just
mentioned incidentally as being the treatment for the primary pathological cause.
13.160 According to Mrs Evans, after she had taken down the report of the death, she would have
discussed it with Mr Revington, who must have said that there should be an autopsy. She
would then have spoken again to Dr Pyburn to inform her of this decision. Dr Pyburn did
315
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
not accept this; she said that she spoke only once to the coroner’s officer and that there
was never any doubt or discussion as to whether an autopsy was needed.
13.161 When questioned, Mrs Evans accepted that she herself sometimes authorised an autopsy
in cases in which it was plain to her that the doctor was not in a position to certify the cause
of death. She said that she would not have done so in this case because the mention of
morphine ‘rang warning bells’. I do not accept the reasoning behind this remark. If
morphine rang warning bells in Mrs Evans’ mind, it would surely be to convince her that
the Coroner must accept jurisdiction and it would follow that there would have to be an
autopsy. If she was in no doubt about the Coroner ‘taking a case on’, she was accustomed
to order an autopsy without consulting the Coroner. I am unable to decide whether
Mr Revington was or was not involved in the decision to order an autopsy. However, the
point is not of great importance.
13.162 I have to resolve the conflict of evidence between Dr Pyburn and Mrs Evans. Before
attempting to do so, I must examine the evidence of what happened after the report of the
death was received at the coroner’s office. The way in which the report was handled in the
coroner’s office throws some light on the conflict of evidence.
The Involvement of Mrs Collins
13.163 In 1995, Mrs Joan Collins worked as Mr Revington’s second coroner’s officer, placing her
one rung below Mrs Evans. She was involved in dealing with Mrs Overton’s death at some
time after Mrs Evans had taken the initial report. She had no independent recollection of
her involvement but recognised marks and writing she had made on the form. She said
that she had made the red ticks on the first few lines and had written the following entries,
in the order in which they appear on the form:
‘Ask Terry to check’ [in pencil]
Robinson ! Jordan,Hyde. [in red ink] Funeral fixed for
Friday 28.4.95’ [in pencil]
‘Dr D L Bee
Ia Hypoxic cerebral degeneration’ [in red ink]
13.164 The last two lines of that record were plainly made after the autopsy had been carried
out on 26th April. Dr Bee was the pathologist responsible. Of more immediate interest
is the entry ‘Ask Terry to check’. ‘Terry’ must be a reference to Police Constable (PC)
Theresa King, then Tameside Division police coroner’s officer. She was based at
Ashton-under-Lyne police station and the mortuary at Tameside General Hospital. She
was accustomed to undertake enquiries for the Coroner. Mrs Collins could not
remember when or in what circumstances she came to make this entry; nor could she
remember speaking to PC King or even what it was that PC King had to check. She
postulated that Mr Revington had been in court when the report of the death was initially
taken and that, on his return, he saw it and asked Mrs Collins to pass a message to PC
King. Mrs Collins now believes that Mr Revington must have wanted to know whether
morphine had been given 14 months earlier, and by whom and in what circumstances.
I think she is probably correct.
316
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
The Involvement of Police Constable King
13.165PC King came to the Inquiry voluntarily from the Republic of Ireland, where she has lived
since her retirement from the police force. Although Mrs King is no longer a police officer,
I shall refer to her as PC King throughout this Chapter. In 1995, she was experienced in
police work and had been the police coroner’s officer since 1985. However, she had no
medical training or knowledge, save what she had picked up in the course of her work.
13.166 The usual procedure, in the case of a hospital death that had been reported to the coroner,
was for one of the coroner’s officers to ask PC King to complete Forms 751 and 751A, the
functions of which I have explained in Chapter Four. PC King would receive information
from the report of the death to the coroner’s office and would then ask the next of kin or a
member of the deceased’s family to attend the mortuary to identify the body. PC King
would check the information given to the coroner’s office with the next of kin and would
complete the forms. The information on the forms is duplicated to a large extent. Both
contain some limited information about the medical history and circumstances of the
death. Form 751 is returned to the coroner’s office; Form 751A is left at the mortuary for
the pathologist. This form contains a specific request for ‘Any other information which
may assist the Pathologist to determine cause of death’.
13.167 PC King arranged for Dr Overton to attend her office, situated in the Tameside General
Hospital mortuary complex, probably on 24th April. She completed Form 751 on the basis
of information supplied by Dr Overton, the Coroner’s staff and, in relation to the time of
death, information probably obtained from the ward. The important evidence as to the
medical history and the circumstances of the collapse and of the death was, I am sure,
provided by the Coroner’s staff and not by Dr Pyburn. It was not usual for PC King to speak
to the doctor who had made the report. PC King did not seek from Dr Overton, and nor did
Dr Overton offer, any elucidation as to the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s original
collapse. PC King said that she would not normally do so, even when the next of kin was
a doctor. Dr Overton and the rest of the family had, of course, long since decided to ‘let
sleeping dogs lie’.
13.168 On Form 751, PC King stated that Mrs Overton had suffered from asthma and was
hypothyroid. She recorded that Mrs Overton had been admitted on 18th February 1994,
after a respiratory arrest. She had been in a coma for over a year.
13.169 Form 751A contains essentially the same information. Responding to the specific request
for any other information which might assist the pathologist to determine the cause of
death, PC King wrote:
‘Dr. states possible cause of death as:
Persistant [sic] vegetative state,due to
resp. arrest,due to asthma,Also
morphine administration.’
It is likely that the ‘possible cause of death’ was based on what Dr Pyburn had told
Mrs Evans. PC King wrote Dr Pyburn’s name at the top of Form 751A. When Forms 751
and 751A were complete, PC King followed her usual practice and sent Form 751 back to
the coroner’s office and left Form 751A for the attention of the pathologist.
317
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
13.170 I observe in passing that the process of completion of Form 751A involved two medically
unqualified people (a coroner’s officer and a police coroner’s officer) being used as
conduits for information passing between a doctor who had treated the deceased and
reported the death and a pathologist who was to decide (when the doctor could not) what
was the cause of death. This is not a satisfactory way of communicating information which
might be of a technical nature.
13.171 The autopsy was to take place on Wednesday, 26th April. PC King was not usually
expected to carry out any further investigations until after the autopsy, when the coroner
would decide whether or not to hold an inquest. If there were to be an inquest, PC King
might then undertake some further investigations. However, it is clear that, on this
occasion, PC King was asked to undertake an enquiry before the autopsy. Unfortunately,
there is no record of the nature of the enquiry, and this is consistent with the poor quality
of record keeping in the coroner’s office at that time. It is only possible to work out what
the request must have been from a note made on 25th April by Mrs Margaret Blake, the
third coroner’s officer (and the third person in the office to have been involved with
Mrs Overton’s death). It is plainly a note of PC King’s report to the office of what she had
found out in response to the request for her ‘to check’.
13.172 This note clearly shows that PC King must have been asked to find out from Shipman what
had happened when he had attended upon Mrs Overton on 18th February 1994. PC King
was at pains to point out that, had she been told that there was a suggestion that poor
practice by Shipman had caused or contributed to Mrs Overton’s death, she would not
have spoken to him. I accept her evidence on this point. It would have been quite
inappropriate for a police officer of her rank to undertake any investigation of an allegation
of potential negligence or misconduct by a doctor. Moreover, I do not think the Coroner
would have asked her to make such an enquiry if he had realised that there was any
suggestion that Shipman might have been at fault in the treatment he had given
Mrs Overton. I am satisfied that PC King had been given no warning that Shipman might
be at fault. Indeed, in view of the fact that the request that she should speak to Shipman
probably came from Mrs Collins, who had not taken the original report and would have had
before her only the written report form, there does not seem to have been any opportunity
for PC King to be told of Dr Pyburn’s concerns, assuming that she had expressed them.
However, PC King knew that the administration of morphine was said to be an underlying
cause of death and that it was a potentially dangerous drug. Had she thought the matter
through, she might have realised that malpractice by Shipman was a possible explanation
for what had occurred. However, she did not.
13.173 Mrs Blake’s note confirms that Shipman accepted that he had been called out to see
Mrs Overton; she was suffering an asthma attack and he had stabilised her. He had then
gone upstairs to tell Mrs Carrington that her mother would need some hydrocortisone.
When he returned, he had found Mrs Overton flat on the floor. There is no record that he
mentioned chest pain. Nor did he apparently tell PC King why Mrs Overton had collapsed.
The note records that Shipman then commenced resuscitation. The ambulance crew
arrived. Although they had ‘managed to get a beat’, Shipman took the view that
Mrs Overton was ‘brain dead’. She had been in a coma ever since. The penultimate
sentence of Mrs Blake’s note of PC King’s report reads:
318
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
‘Dr Shipman does not feel there was anything perculiar [sic]. She had
some emotional problems in the past but everything seemed to be ok at
the time.’
13.174 When PC King was asked how she could have failed to ask Shipman what part, if any,
morphine had played in Mrs Overton’s death, she replied, with commendable frankness,
that she had ‘absolutely no idea.’ She conceded that it really had been up to her to ask him
that question. PC King agreed also that it appears that she had not asked Shipman what
had caused Mrs Overton’s sudden collapse. She explained that, because she used to
work across two sites, at the mortuary and at the police station, she may have had neither
her notes nor Forms 751 or 751A in front of her, when speaking to Shipman. This would be
quite unsatisfactory but may explain, though it could not excuse, her failure to raise those
matters with him.
13.175It is clear that PC King did not appreciate that this death was in any way problematical and
did not have any clear idea of what she was trying to find out. She cannot have been told
that there was any suspicion that a medical error had been made. I think she approached
Shipman asking for a purely factual account of what had happened. I think she would then
have accepted his account without question and without considering whether he had
provided the answers she needed. I think it likely that, in common with many people in
Hyde at the time, she was taken in by Shipman’s confident manner and possibly cowed
by his condescending attitude. I think that, having only an imperfect understanding of
what she was supposed to be finding out, she did not stop to think for long about what she
had (and had not) been told. I bear in mind that PC King had no medical background or
training, and was ill equipped to question Shipman or to go behind his assertion that there
was nothing peculiar about the death.
13.176 Mrs Blake said that she took the message without knowing what PC King had been asked
to find out or why she had been asked. She said that, even if she had seen the original
report at the time of taking the message, she would not have realised that the issue of the
administration of morphine had not been addressed because her role was simply to take
down the message. There is no evidence as to whether the Coroner ever saw the note of
PC King’s enquiry of Shipman. He should have done and it should have been clear to him
that Shipman had not confirmed or denied the administration of morphine. Nor had he
explained why Mrs Overton had collapsed so suddenly in his absence. Even if
Mr Revington had not previously been alerted to the possibility that Shipman had given an
overdose, he should have recognised the need to find out if, when and why morphine had
been given and what reason Shipman was giving for the collapse. As Mr Revington is not
able to answer questions from the Inquiry owing to ill health, it will never be known what
was in his mind at this stage of the investigation into Mrs Overton’s death.
13.177 I conclude that Mrs King did fail properly to investigate and report upon the circumstances
of Mrs Overton’s collapse. In particular, she failed to ask Shipman whether he had given
any morphine and why he thought Mrs Overton had collapsed in his absence. I am quite
sure that Shipman was very persuasive and authoritative when they spoke and I accept
that she had no prior suspicion that his treatment of Mrs Overton might have been
incorrect. It is to her considerable credit that she acknowledged her fault when she gave
319
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
her oral evidence. It is also to her credit, and for this I am very grateful, that she attended
the oral hearings from the Republic of Ireland, when she could not have been compelled
to attend.
Resolving the Conflict of Evidence between Dr Pyburn and Mrs Evans
13.178 I found Dr Pyburn a most persuasive witness. She is intelligent, quietly articulate and
obviously sincere. Whether or not her evidence is true and accurate is a different question.
Listening to her, I felt convinced by her claim that she was determined to ensure that the
circumstances of Mrs Overton’s respiratory arrest in February 1994 were fully
investigated. I went so far as to express that view during oral submissions. Yet, careful
analysis of the whole of the relevant evidence has made me aware that there are several
factors that point against this conclusion.
13.179 First, the fact that Dr Pyburn said that she was reluctant to use plain language critical of
Shipman when making the report suggests to me that she was also ambivalent about
conveying the message that Mrs Overton was the victim of a ‘medical mishap’. It may well
be that Dr Pyburn mentioned the administration of morphine in its natural position in a
narrative explanation of the course of events. It may well be that she also said that
morphine had been given by a doctor in circumstances in which it would not normally be
given. If she did, I do not think that those expressions would necessarily have made
Mrs Evans realise that Dr Pyburn was concerned about the treatment. I am quite satisfied
that Dr Pyburn did not criticise the treatment directly. As I have already said, I find it hard
to understand why, if she were anxious to report her concerns about the treatment, she
could not bring herself to do so in clear language, without prejudging any issue.
13.180 Second, the extremely scanty details of the death recorded by Mrs Evans suggest that
Dr Pyburn may not have given as full an account of the circumstances as she claims. I am
satisfied that neither Mrs Evans nor anyone in the coroner’s office realised that it was being
suggested that Shipman had done anything wrong. PC King would not have been sent to
make enquiry of Shipman if it had been realised that there was a possibility that his
treatment of Mrs Overton might be called into question at an inquest. I observe, in passing,
that the report of death, as recorded by Mrs Evans, was not adequate, either to allow the
Coroner to decide whether or not an inquest into the circumstances of the respiratory
arrest was necessary or for him to consider whether or not to approve the provisional
causes of death. Whatever she believed the purpose of the report to be, Mrs Evans should
have asked far more questions about the circumstances than she did. I do not criticise her
personally for this, as I am satisfied that, at any rate at this period, decisions were often
made in the coroner’s office on inadequate material.
13.181 Third, there is the fact that the proposed causes of death were written down in pencil,
which was, I accept, the usual practice in the office where a doctor was seeking the
Coroner’s approval to issue an MCCD. Dr Pyburn said that she had no recollection of
providing any causes of death and, indeed, on the first day of her evidence, asserted that
she had not done so. However, on reflection, she accepted that she must have done.
There was no one else who could have formulated them. Mrs Evans did not have the
medical knowledge to do so. Dr Pyburn was unable to suggest how this might have come
320
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
about. I think it is not impossible to imagine circumstances in which Mrs Evans might have
encouraged Dr Pyburn to provide provisional causes of death, even though she was
reporting her concerns about the circumstances of the death. However, a far more simple
and obvious explanation for the proffering of the provisional causes is that Dr Pyburn was
seeking approval for the causes of death but, when Mrs Evans heard and wrote the words
‘morphine administration’, they rang warning bells and she (or the Coroner) decided that
there would have to be an autopsy.
13.182 Fourth, Dr Pyburn’s own note in the clinical records of her conversation with Mrs Evans
suggests either that Dr Pyburn had telephoned the office to seek approval for the
proposed causes of death and permission to issue an MCCD (which had been refused)
or that her report had been ‘neutral’ in that she was just putting the case before the Coroner
in case he wanted to investigate it.
13.183 I have found this a difficult issue to resolve. In the end I have been driven to doubt my own
reaction to Dr Pyburn’s evidence. I have concluded that it is more likely that Dr Pyburn
telephoned the coroner’s office to seek approval for her proposed causes of death than
that she reported the death because she wished her concerns to be investigated. I think
it likely that, since Shipman’s exposure, Dr Pyburn has come to believe that she reported
this death for investigation, when the truth is that she did not. I think it likely that, following
her realisation that Shipman was a mass murderer, she became far more concerned about
Mrs Overton’s death than she had been at the time of the death. With the passage of time,
she has, I think, come to believe that she was deeply concerned. As she knows that it was
she who reported the death to the Coroner, I think she has become convinced that she
did so only because she was determined that the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s original
collapse should be investigated. I think she had been concerned about the reasons for
Mrs Overton’s collapse but that she had put her concerns to the back of her mind because
Dr Husaini and Dr Rushton had told her that the case had been ‘looked into’ around the
time of her first admission to hospital. In those circumstances, being still somewhat
concerned, Dr Pyburn decided that the death should be reported to the Coroner so that
he would have the opportunity to look into the death if he thought it appropriate. I think that
she was willing to certify the causes of death, if the Coroner gave his approval. Although
I reject her evidence as inaccurate, I do not think Dr Pyburn deliberately misled the Inquiry.
Nor do I criticise her conduct. Considering her state of mind, as I have found it to have
been, I consider that her decision to report the death in a neutral way was not
unreasonable.
The Autopsy
Dr Bee
13.184 Dr David Lyle Bee was a consultant pathologist for 26 years from 1969 until his retirement
in October 1995. He used to perform about 20 autopsies a week. On some days he might
carry out as many as eight. The most usual number was three or four. Eighty per cent of
those autopsies were for the Coroner. He said that the performance of an autopsy could
last anything between 15minutes and 2 hours, depending on its complexity. He told the
Inquiry that coroners’ autopsies were usually less complex than hospital autopsies. He
321
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
thought that the autopsy performed in Mrs Overton’s case was straightforward and would
have lasted about 20 minutes. Not surprisingly, he had no recollection of the case and
relied on his limited contemporaneous records, combined with his recollection as to what
was then his usual practice.
13.185According to Dr Bee, he felt under some kind of self-imposed pressure to find a natural
cause of death in order to avoid an inquest. If he was satisfied that the cause was natural,
but the evidence revealed only a possible cause, he would nevertheless record that that
was the actual cause of death if there was no other obvious competing cause. I
understand that this is not an uncommon practice. Dr Bee said that there were very few
cases in which he reported that no definite cause of death could be found; in evidence,
he said that this would happen in about one case in 40 or perhaps once a month (which
would amount to about one case in 85).
13.186 I find it disappointing that a consultant pathologist should have so lax an approach to a
scientific examination. Dr Bee did not explain why he felt under such self-imposed
pressure. It seems likely that he felt that he would be doing the Coroner, the deceased’s
relatives and himself a favour if he were able to avoid an inquest.
Professor Whitwell
13.187 Professor Helen Whitwell gave evidence to the Inquiry on several occasions. She is
Professor of Forensic Pathology and Head of the Department of Forensic Pathology at the
University of Sheffield. I have dealt with some of her evidence in Chapters Nine and Ten.
She provided written and oral evidence dealing with Dr Bee’s involvement in
Mrs Overton’s case. I found her evidence very helpful. I remind myself that I should not
expect the same level of forensic skill in a consultant pathologist in a general hospital (as
Dr Bee was) as that of a forensic pathologist, particularly one of Professor Whitwell’s
experience and ability.
Dr Bee’s Report
13.188 Dr Bee said that, when conducting the autopsy on Mrs Overton, he had available the
medical notes and records and Form 751A. The information on Form 751A was, as I have
said, very limited. In particular, Dr Bee had not been alerted to any concerns felt by the
hospital staff as to the propriety of the morphine administered. However, if he had read the
medical notes, he should have seen the dosage of morphine and the opinions of the junior
doctors that the morphine given by the general practitioner had caused or contributed to
Mrs Overton’s initial collapse and precipitated her persistent vegetative state. It is worth
noting, however, that neither Dr Brown nor Dr Husaini had recorded in the clinical notes
any opinion as to the conduct of the general practitioner. Had they done so, the post-death
investigations might well have followed a very different course.
13.189 The autopsy was performed at 10am on Wednesday, 26th April. The signed typewritten
autopsy report (or ‘POST MORTEM EXAMINATION REPORT’) itself is extremely brief. It
records that the brain was small with dilated ventricles. It was generally soft, especially in
the parietal regions. There was a little atheroma of the cerebral circulation. The bronchi
322
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
were clear although there was a little congestion and oedema of the lungs. The heart
weighed 254g and there was mild atheroma of the coronary circulation. The liver and
kidneys were said to be congested.
13.190 The report form invites the pathologist to provide an opinion as to the causes of death. It
explains that the pathologist should list, first, the disease or condition directly leading to
death, next, any morbid conditions giving rise to the direct cause, and, last, any other
significant conditions contributing to the death but not related to the disease or condition
causing it. An explanatory note states that what is sought is the disease, injury or
complication which caused the death and not the mode of dying.
13.191 Dr Bee gave the opinion that the cause of Mrs Overton’s death was hypoxic cerebral
degeneration. Whilst this may accurately explain that shortage of oxygen had caused
degeneration of Mrs Overton’s brain and that this had caused her death, it does not
explain what had caused the oxygen deprivation. It may seem trite to say so but the human
brain is normally well perfused with oxygen. It is obvious, and must at the time have been
obvious to Dr Bee, that there must have been some mechanism to cause that position to
alter and yet he seems not to have realised this. Without apparently determining what had
caused Mrs Overton’s brain to be deprived of oxygen, Dr Bee went on to state:
‘In my opinion death was due to natural causes.’
13.192 It must have been clear to Dr Bee that, since 14 months had passed since Mrs Overton’s
original collapse, pathological examination was unlikely to reveal a great deal about the
circumstances of the collapse. In fact, as Dr Bee accepted, it revealed absolutely nothing
about them. It might have been expected to reveal (as it did) something about
Mrs Overton’s cardiac condition and it would have been expected (as it did) to reveal
severe cerebral atrophy. So, all that the autopsy could tell Dr Bee was that the immediate
cause of Mrs Overton’s death was hypoxic cerebral degeneration. If he accepted that the
degeneration had followed a cardiac arrest (which was mentioned as a possibility in the
notes), he would be able to say, from the autopsy, that it was unlikely that the cardiac arrest
had been caused by ischaemic heart disease. But, from the autopsy, he could not form
any view whatever as to what had caused the cardiac arrest. As Professor Whitwell
explained, the appearance of the brain some months after a severe hypoxic episode
would be the same however the hypoxic episode had occurred. For example, there would
be no way of telling from the brain whether the hypoxia had been caused by near
drowning, by near suffocation, by a naturally occurring cardiac arrest or by a cardiac
arrest induced by the administration of an overdose of a respiratory depressant such as
morphine. Dr Bee did not disagree with that proposition. It is clear that his conclusion that
the death was due to natural causes could not properly have been based upon his
autopsy findings.
13.193 Dr Bee claimed that he had reached his conclusion that the death was due to natural
causes after perusing the hospital notes. He could not remember exactly what he had
read but said that he would have looked only at the casualty notes and the other notes at
the beginning of the file, as the whole file was ‘rather substantial’.
13.194 Dr Bee said that his examination of the notes drew him to the conclusion that ventricular
fibrillation had led to cardiac arrest and was the principal cause of death. This ventricular
323
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
fibrillation could have resulted from ‘spasm of the coronary artery or something like that
rather than the morphia’. Dr Bee was ‘inclined to think that ventricular fibrillation came
before the respiratory arrest’. For many reasons, I find it impossible to accept that Dr Bee
reached any such conclusions.
13.195First, I observe that he did not enter ventricular fibrillation as the underlying cause of death
on the autopsy report, as he should have done, had that been his opinion. Second, Dr Bee
did not mention this conclusion in his written statements to the Inquiry. He revealed it for
the first time in his oral evidence. By that time, Dr Bee was aware that he was open to
criticism for having certified that the death was due to natural causes without having any
proper basis to do so. In oral evidence, Dr Bee sought to reconstruct what had been in his
mind at the time of reporting on the autopsy examination. I cannot accept that the reasons
and explanations he gave were in fact operating on his mind at the time. I am afraid that
by the end of his evidence, I was quite satisfied that Dr Bee’s endeavours were directed
far more towards creating a picture that would result in his being absolved from blame
than towards genuinely working out what had been in his mind at the time.
13.196 Third, Dr Bee’s conclusion that the cause of Mrs Overton’s death was ventricular
fibrillation was not soundly based. There was no pathological evidence to explain why the
patient might have gone into ventricular fibrillation and Dr Bee was forced to speculate
that this might have happened as the result of some coronary artery spasm. Dr Bee drew
attention to the entries in the early clinical notes suggesting the possibility of ischaemic
heart disease but apparently chose to ignore the fact that Mrs Overton’s heart was
revealed to be normal, both in the clinical assessments following her admission to hospital
and as part of his own autopsy examination. Ventricular fibrillation was one possible cause
of the death but there was nothing to suggest that it was a more likely cause than any other.
13.197 Fourth, if Dr Bee did think that the death was due to ventricular fibrillation and was
prepared to certify the death as being due to natural causes for that reason, he must have
known that, in so concluding, he was in disagreement with the views expressed by the
treating doctors in the clinical notes. Those notes make it clear that those treating doctors
who expressed an opinion had reached the view that the administration of morphine had
played a part in Mrs Overton’s respiratory arrest. Although the notes contain conflicting
information as to whether Mrs Overton had or had not suffered chest pain before her
collapse, there was abundant material to suggest that the collapse had been caused by
the administration of 20mg of morphine, given intravenously in a bolus dose. In addition,
Form 751A flagged up the belief of the reporting doctor that morphine had been an
underlying cause of death. Professor Whitwell said that the mention of morphine as a
potential contributory cause of death should have sounded warning bells in the mind of
any pathologist.
13.198 Dr Bee had little knowledge (and certainly far less experience than the treating doctors)
of the circumstances in which it might or might not be appropriate to give morphine to a
patient. This is not surprising and he should not be blamed for it, because it is likely that
many pathologists would be similarly unaware. Further, he did not know what dosages of
morphine would be appropriate. Yet, he did not speak to any member of the clinical team
from ward 17, such as Dr Pyburn, whose name was mentioned on Form 751A. The reason
324
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Dr Bee gave for this omission was that Dr Pyburn would have been able to say no more
than the notes said. That explanation is not acceptable. What Dr Bee needed was advice
about whether it would have been reasonable for the general practitioner treating
Mrs Overton to give 20mg morphine as a bolus dose, and whether such a dose given in
that way might be expected to cause respiratory depression or arrest. There can be no
doubt what advice he would have received had he made such an enquiry. I agree with
Professor Whitwell that, before he reached any conclusion about whether the death was
natural, Dr Bee should have discussed the case with the treating clinicians. In evidence,
Dr Bee said that he considered that, if a patient suffering from an asthma attack was
suffering from the ‘psychological overlay’ that sometimes increases pain, it might be
legitimate to give morphine. The notion that any doctor who knew anything about the
effects of morphine would think it reasonable to give a 20mg bolus dose for ‘psychological
overlay’ enters the realm of fantasy. Dr Bee said that it did not appear to him that the
administration of morphine had been inappropriate. He said he would on that issue rely on
the judgement of the clinician who administered it. He did not think of checking the British
National Formulary to ascertain what was said about dosage and mode of administration.
13.199 In short, I cannot believe that Dr Bee actually went through so deeply flawed a process of
reasoning as could have resulted in an honest conclusion that the death had been caused
by ventricular fibrillation leading to cardiac arrest and had not been caused or contributed
to by the inappropriate administration of morphine. He admitted in evidence that his
conclusion involved a significant degree of speculation. In my view, his opinion that the
death had been due to natural causes can be explained only by his misplaced desire to
avoid the need for an inquest. It is possible that he concluded, after brief and superficial
thought, that the collapse might have been due to an asthma attack. Whatever he thought,
his reported conclusion that this death was due to natural causes was untenable and his
performance inadequate. I recognise that he had not been alerted, as explicitly as he
might have been, to the possibility that Shipman had made a serious error in treatment.
However, knowing, as he did, that there was a possibility that morphine had caused or
contributed to the death, it was quite wrong of him to discount that possibility and certify
that the death was due to natural causes, without even making the enquiries I have
mentioned.
13.200 When Dr Bee came to communicate his findings to the coroner’s office he should have
made it plain that, although he had found an immediate cause of death, cerebral hypoxic
degeneration, and believed that the underlying cause of that was a cardiac arrest some
14 months earlier, he was unable to establish the underlying cause of the cardiac arrest.
It would then follow that he was unable to say whether the death had been due to natural
causes. That should have been the gist of the oral report that Dr Bee gave to the coroner’s
office as soon as he had completed the autopsy. If he had said that or something like that,
the Coroner would have ordered an inquest. The same message should also have been
reflected in Dr Bee’s written report which was to follow. In the event, as I shall shortly
explain, it seems likely that, when reporting orally, Dr Bee mentioned only the immediate
cause of death, cerebral hypoxic degeneration, and said nothing more.
13.201 A particularly unattractive feature of Dr Bee’s evidence was his attempt to justify his
opinion that the death had been the result of natural causes by saying that there had been
325
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
no way of proving otherwise, and that, at any inquest that might have taken place,
Shipman would have given an account to justify the administration of morphine, and that
that account would have been believed at the time. That may be so; much would have
depended upon the thoroughness of the investigation carried out by the Coroner before
the inquest and the willingness of doctors such as Dr Husaini, Dr Brown and Dr Pyburn
(any of whom might have been called to give evidence) openly to criticise Shipman’s
treatment. Whatever difficulties there might have been at inquest, there is no excuse for
the serious deficiencies of Dr Bee’s work.
Mr Revington Decides that No Inquest Is Necessary
13.202 Mr Revington was 74 years old when Mrs Overton died. He was to retire at the age of 75.
Although he did not enjoy the best of physical health, having suffered from polio as a child,
he still retained all his mental faculties.
13.203 As I have already explained, I am unable to decide whether Mr Revington was personally
involved in the decision to order an autopsy, although I suspect that he may not have been.
I am satisfied, however, that he was behind the decision to ‘Ask Terry to check’. By the
time that instruction was given, he was clearly aware in general terms that it had been
suggested that one of the underlying causes of Mrs Overton’s death was the
administration of morphine. I infer, from the terms of Mrs Blake’s report of PC King’s
conversation with Shipman, that Mr Revington had asked for clarification of the
circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse, including the possible involvement of
morphine.
13.204 When Mr Revington received the report of PC King’s enquiry, probably on 25th April, he
should have realised that it did not provide answers to two obviously important questions.
Had Shipman given Mrs Overton any morphine? Why had she collapsed? It appears that
Mr Revington did not ask for any further enquiry to be made. It seems likely that he was
generally reassured by the final sentence of the report, that there was nothing peculiar
about the death.
13.205The result of the autopsy was almost certainly telephoned through to the coroner’s office
by Dr Bee or someone acting on his behalf, at some time during the late morning or
afternoon of Wednesday, 26th April. Mrs Collins wrote on the report of death form that the
cause of death was hypoxic cerebral degeneration. She did not write ‘natural causes’.
I think that she would have done, if she had been told that that was Dr Bee’s opinion.
13.206 Mr Revington’s task was then to decide whether or not to hold an inquest. He made that
decision on Wednesday, 26th April. If he was satisfied that the death was due to natural
causes and that the cause of death was known, he would decide that an inquest was not
necessary and he would send a Form 100B to the register office, confirming that he did
not consider it necessary to hold an inquest and stating the cause(s) of death found at
autopsy. The bundle of papers on which Mr Revington was to base his decision included
Mrs Evans’ initial report of the death, Form 751, and Mrs Blake’s file note of PC King’s
report. It is not clear whether or not the written autopsy report was by then available.
Usually, there would be a little delay between the completion of the autopsy and delivery
326
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
of the written report; that is why the result was usually communicated informally by
telephone. As Mr Revington made his decision on the same day as the autopsy took place,
I think it likely that he considered his decision before receiving the written report.
13.207 On examination of the papers, it should have been apparent to Mr Revington that the
autopsy had confirmed the immediate cause of death proposed by the reporting doctor
from the hospital but had not confirmed the proposed underlying causes. He should have
realised that he did not know the underlying causes of the cerebral degeneration or
whether the death was due to natural causes. He must have known that cerebral hypoxic
degeneration can result from a great number of different causes, some natural and some
unnatural. He must, for example, have been aware of the case of Mr Bland, to which I
referred earlier. The decision of the House of Lords in that case was a landmark of which
all coroners should have been aware. The mention in Mrs Evans’ note of Mrs Overton’s
persistent vegetative state, combined with the reference to her having been in a coma for
over a year, probably would, in my view, have struck Mr Revington as resonant of
Mr Bland’s case. Mr Bland had suffered his injuries in the Hillsborough disaster, as I have
already stated.
13.208 In my view, Mr Revington could not properly have reached a decision not to hold an
inquest on the basis of the information in the papers before him, unless those papers
included Dr Bee’s written report, which seems very unlikely. It is possible that
Mr Revington spoke to Dr Bee on the telephone and asked him if he thought the death was
due to natural causes. Dr Bee has no recollection of such a conversation but that does not
mean it did not happen. However, Mr Revington did not make a note on the file to say that
he had spoken to Dr Bee. As it was his usual practice to make a note of any such
conversations, I infer that it is unlikely that he did so in this case. In any event, Mr Revington
decided that no inquest was necessary and he issued Form 100B, giving the cause of
death as cerebral hypoxic degeneration. He also issued Coroner’s Certificate ‘E’ for
Cremation (Form E) in which he said that he was satisfied that there were no
circumstances likely to call for further examination of Mrs Overton’s body. That would
permit the medical referee to authorise cremation of her body. With the signing of these
forms, Mr Revington effectively closed the enquiry into the circumstances of
Mrs Overton’s death. Yet the question as to the role played by morphine in the death
remained unanswered.
13.209 Mrs Collins said that she was surprised that no inquest took place because the autopsy
report did not say what had caused the coma. She agreed that the circumstances would
cry out for an inquest. She was also surprised that hypoxic cerebral degeneration was
given as the cause of death with no underlying cause stated.
13.210 Why did Mr Revington decide not to hold an inquest? I think that the answer is that
Mr Revington did not think through the issues in the case with sufficient thoroughness or
clarity. I have said that the mention of morphine in the written report of the death
undoubtedly prompted the involvement of PC King. However, I am satisfied that
Mr Revington did not realise, when he suggested that PC King make that further enquiry,
that it was being suggested that Shipman had made a gross error of judgement in his
administration of morphine and that this had led to Mrs Overton’s original collapse. Had
327
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
he done so, he would not have suggested so informal an enquiry. Had he known of that
suggestion, he would have been less willing to close the investigation without an inquest.
I think that Mr Revington understood no more than that it was being suggested that one of
the underlying causes of death was the administration of morphine and that he wanted to
know more.
13.211 I think that Mr Revington also fell prey to two pieces of misinformation with which he was
provided. First, he relied uncritically on the passage in the note of PC King’s report that
Shipman had not felt that there was anything peculiar about the death. He plainly should
not have done so and he should have made further enquiries as to the administration of
morphine. Second, he accepted the cause of death stated by Dr Bee, although, as I have
already said, that did not explain what had caused the cardiac arrest and coma; nor did
it suggest that Dr Bee had considered and discounted the role played by morphine in the
death. Again, Mr Revington should not have done so. He could, had he been reluctant to
order an inquest, have spoken to one of the doctors on ward 17 (Dr Pyburn’s name was
available to him) and enquired what information was available about the use of morphine.
I am sure Dr Pyburn would have told him that the notes suggested a 20mg bolus dose,
which was extremely large.
The Registration of the Death
13.212 On the basis of Mr Revington’s Form 100B, Miss Marilyn Partoon, registrar at the
Tameside register office, recorded that the cause of death was hypoxic cerebral
degeneration and the death was duly registered.
The Reaction of Dr Husaini and Dr Pyburn
13.213 Dr Husaini says he was worried when he realised that there was to be no inquest, but did
nothing. He had expected that the Coroner would have looked into the death and would
have spoken to Shipman. He said that he cried when time passed and he had not been
asked to provide a report and realised that there had been no inquest and that the death
must have been registered.
13.214 If Dr Husaini really was so concerned, it is very surprising that he did not then pursue the
matter with the Coroner, Chief Executive or any other person or body, especially when he
knew that there had been no investigation immediately following the initial collapse. I do
not accept that Dr Husaini was at all concerned about the fact that there had been no
inquest.
13.215Dr Pyburn said that she believed that her report of the death would lead to a discussion
with the family, followed by an autopsy and inquest. In her previous experience of
coroners’ cases, there had been no communication back from the coroner following the
initial report. On one occasion, Dr Pyburn had been told that she was not even entitled to
the result of the autopsy. She told me that she would not have expected to be contacted
about any information that she could give because she had not been present at the time
of Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital.
328
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
The Actions of the Doctors following Shipman’s Arrest
13.216 In the course of the police enquiries following Shipman’s arrest, investigating officers
sought witness statements from Dr Husaini and Dr Brown, in relation to Mrs Overton’s
case. As I have already said, both sought advice from the MDU. For the purposes of the
Inquiry, both waived any privilege that might have attached to relevant communications.
I have already dealt with Dr Brown’s communications and his police statement in
paragraphs 13.86 to 13.89.
13.217 Dr Husaini telephoned the MDU on 24th November 1998. Having explained the
background to the MDU adviser, Mr Kuncewicz, Dr Husaini apparently said that he felt
vulnerable because he had been aware that Mrs Overton had been treated with morphine.
He was unsure whether this was substantiated in the notes but he thought it might have
contributed to the death. He was advised to obtain a copy of the medical notes and
records and to send a draft statement to the MDU for approval. He was advised that the
statement was to be factual and had not to contain assumptions.
13.218 There then followed some correspondence and, on 11th December, Dr Husaini wrote to
the MDU advisers, giving an account of the relevant history and enclosing Mrs Overton’s
hospital notes. The letter refers to the circumstances surrounding the original admission
to hospital. Dr Husaini expressed no reservations about the accuracy of the history that he
described which was, in summary, that Shipman had first nebulised Mrs Overton for an
asthma attack and had then given 20mg morphine, which had caused respiratory arrest.
The letter goes on to describe the contact that he had had with the Coroner and Mr Charles
Howorth, the Health Authority’s legal adviser. His previous contact with Mr Revington was
said to have been ‘regarding ... withholding treatment’. This was, as I have explained,
inconsistent with the account he gave to the Inquiry, in which he said that he also voiced
his concerns about the treatment initially given.
13.219 Further, Dr Husaini told the MDU that he had reported his concerns to Mr Howorth and
had:
‘... clearly mentioned that the patient had received I.V. morphine
following which she became unresponsive’.
He continued by saying that, after the patient’s death, the case was reported to the
coroner. He did not say why or with what effect. He then added:
‘There is no doubt that ventolin nebulisers can induce ventricular
fibrillation. There is also no doubt that morphine,by suppressing
respiration in a patient who is already anoxic can induce ventricular
fibrillation.’
13.220 Dr Husaini went on to explain that he had at no stage spoken to Shipman and asked
whether he should have done. He added:
‘Family Practitioners do sometimes use morphine to sedate patients
who are restless.’
13.221 Finally he said:
‘I do not think I am in any way responsible for her death.’
329
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
It seems to me that, at this time, Dr Husaini was feeling vulnerable. He was concerned that
he had not investigated what Shipman had done by speaking to him. Also, he was seeking
to imply, without actually saying so, that he had reported his concerns to Mr Howorth. I
have already found that Dr Husaini did not report his concerns to Mr Howorth. He was also
seeking to suggest that Mrs Overton’s respiratory arrest might have been caused by
ventricular fibrillation, due to the use of a ventolin nebuliser, a suggestion that he did not
advance before the Inquiry. He also suggested that the general practitioner might have
been justified in giving morphine if he believed the patient was restless and in need of
sedation. He did not make it plain that the dosage given could never be justified for such
a purpose.
13.222 On 18th December 1998, he wrote to the coroner’s office for the first time on the subject of
Mrs Overton’s case. He asked Mr John Pollard (Mr Revington’s successor) what had been
Mr Revington’s conclusion as to the ‘mechanism of this patient’s death’. I observe again
that it would be most surprising, if Dr Husaini was as upset as he said he was when he
realised there would be no inquest, that he did not contact the Coroner until December
1998. He did so only when he was feeling vulnerable to criticism for not having done more
to bring about an investigation of the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse.
13.223 The MDU replied to Dr Husaini on 22nd December, offering to review any statement made
and explaining that it was not possible to give a specific answer as to what Dr Husaini
ought to have done. He was told that, where he thought that another doctor was causing
harm to patients by inappropriate treatment, he had an ethical duty to point this out to the
doctor. In the event, Dr Husaini was not required to furnish the police with an account of
his involvement in Mrs Overton’s treatment.
Responsibility
13.224 It follows from what I have said that, despite the fact that it was widely known at Tameside
General Hospital, within a short time after Mrs Overton’s admission, that her collapse had
been caused by the inappropriate administration of a large bolus dose of morphine, no
steps were taken during her lifetime to ensure that the cause of her collapse (which had
devastating consequences) was properly investigated. Moreover, after Mrs Overton died,
and when the opportunity arose for a coroner’s investigation into her death, there was
never any proper enquiry into the circumstances.
13.225I do not blame any of the junior doctors for their failure to act. In my view, the responsibility,
if any, for ensuring that the circumstances were reported fell squarely on the shoulders of
Dr Brown and Dr Husaini. I should deal briefly, however, with the state of knowledge of the
doctors and nurses who treated Mrs Overton.
The State of Knowledge of the Nurses and Junior Doctors Treating Mrs Overton
13.226 Dr Husaini said that the doctors who treated Mrs Overton knew the reason for her
collapse. He said:
‘Whenever I would come to the ward I would have mentioned the fact that
this is not right what has been done to her. I freely admit it. I admit
330
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
because you might ask me some further questions as to what I do but I
think it would be unusual or unthinkable of me not to have mentioned
that morphine administered has resulted in unnecessary suffering to a
patient.’
13.227 I accept that Dr Husaini probably did speak openly with his junior colleagues about his
view of the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse. I also think that many of those
treating Mrs Overton independently reached the view that the reason for her collapse was
the inappropriate intravenous injection of a 20mg bolus dose of morphine.
13.228 Dr Lee admitted that both he and Dr Loh thought it unconventional that morphine had
been given to someone who was suffering an asthma attack and they discussed the
issue together. Dr Loh readily admitted that it was clear to him at the time that the dose
of morphine given was excessive. Even in the situation of a concurrent heart attack and
asthma attack, he acknowledged that the maximum dose given would be about 5mg
diamorphine and that this would have to be titrated against response. To his credit,
Dr Loh said, ‘It is right to say that with hindsight I feel upset about the matter and
wish that more had been done.’ I have no reason to doubt the truth of that comment.
I think that Dr Mukhopadhyay must have realised the serious mistake that had been
made and its consequences. Dr Premraj accepted that it was obvious that to have given
20mg morphine was excessive, represented a mistake by whoever had given it and had
caused the respiratory arrest. Dr Rushton acknowledged as much and agreed that all
the junior staff would have felt that what had happened was not right and would have
talked about it. Dr Veerappan realised that an excessive dose of morphine given in an
inappropriate way had caused Mrs Overton’s collapse. He said he would have
discussed this with Dr Brown and the nursing staff. Dr Peters took the view that 20mg
was a huge dose to give. He had no recollection of discussions at the time. I have
explained the reaction of Dr Pyburn when Dr Rushton informed her, in the summer of
1994, of the circumstances leading up to the collapse.
13.229 Statements were taken from 16 nurses who were responsible for Mrs Overton at various
times. Some worked in the ITU and others on ward 17. Five nurses gave oral evidence.
According to almost all of the nurses, it was common knowledge in the ITU and on ward
17 that the reason for Mrs Overton’s condition was that she had been the victim of a
serious mistake by her general practitioner, who had given her an excessive dose of
morphine. After the individual nurses first became aware of the circumstances, which
would normally have been on handover, I am sure that that knowledge slowly receded
to the back of their minds as they concentrated on treating Mrs Overton, although I am
sure they did not forget about it. I am sure that it was the subject of discussion between
the nurses, although again this will have been more the case in February and
March 1994 than later. I am quite satisfied from the evidence I heard that the nursing
staff were fully aware that their consultants knew of the circumstances. I am also
satisfied that they believed that some steps at least had been taken to enquire into the
circumstances.
The Absence of Criticism in the Medical Records
13.230 I note that, despite what was known on the ITU and on ward 17, no expression of anxiety
about or criticism of the general practitioner’s treatment of Mrs Overton was entered in
331
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
the notes and records. Dr Brown said in his written statement that there is a reluctance
to put in writing any adverse comments about the conduct of colleagues for fear that
they could be used in legal cases brought by patients. If this were correct, I would
deprecate such an attitude, which seems to be motivated by a desire to protect doctors
rather than to support patients. I will consider this issue in detail in Stage Four.
The Responsibility of Individuals
13.231 I have made it plain that I am quite satisfied that many among the nursing and medical
staff at Tameside General Hospital were aware of the circumstances that had led up to
Mrs Overton’s collapse. I have also said that I think that the responsibility, if any, for
ensuring that those circumstances were reported and investigated lay on the shoulders
of the two consultants who treated her, Dr Brown and Dr Husaini. I shall postpone my
consideration of whether they should be criticised for their failure to report the
circumstances until I have heard further evidence during Stage Four of Phase Two of the
Inquiry, dealing with the climate or culture surrounding the making of an adverse report
by one doctor about another.
13.232 I can say at this stage, however, that I am left in no doubt that Dr Husaini did not at any
stage report to Mr Revington, Mr Butterworth, Mrs Nuttall or Mr Howorth any concerns that
he may have harboured about the role of Mrs Overton’s general practitioner in her
collapse. It is, I am afraid, to his great discredit that he sought to persuade me otherwise. I
believe that Dr Husaini realised, when preparing his evidence for the Inquiry, that his initial
contact with the Coroner in March 1994 afforded him the opportunity to claim that what
was being discussed around that time was not only Mrs Overton’s future management but
also his concerns over her past treatment. I have rejected that claim.
13.233 So far as Dr Brown is concerned, he did not claim to have reported his concerns to anyone
in authority. Whilst I shall defer consideration of whether he should be criticised in that
respect until after the Stage Four evidence has been heard, I should say at this stage that
I have had no hesitation in rejecting as untrue Dr Brown’s assertion that his state of mind
in 1994 was that the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse were so uncertain that he
could not reasonably act upon them. I think that his state of mind was neatly encapsulated
in the witness statement that he made to the police at the beginning of 1999 when he said
that he had been of the view in 1994 that Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton had been
‘highly unusual even dangerous’.
The Handling of the Report of Death by the Coroner’s Office
13.234 I have explained in detail why I have concluded that neither Dr Pyburn nor Mrs Evans
should be the subject of individual criticism in relation to their respective duties to report
and record the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s death.
13.235However, this case has illustrated the shortcomings of the systems in operation in the
office of the Greater Manchester South Coroner at the material time. First, the report of
the death was taken over the telephone by a coroner’s officer who had no training
whatsoever, other than what she had picked up from colleagues over the years of her
332
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
employment. Mrs Evans followed procedures that I think had probably been in operation
for years. As I have explained in Chapter Seven, coroner’s officers working in the office
of the Greater Manchester South Coroner were permitted to make decisions about
whether or not the Coroner would accept jurisdiction in respect of a death without
reference to the Coroner and on the basis of scanty information. I have said that
Mrs Evans should have obtained far more information from Dr Pyburn before bringing
the conversation to an end. I think that, as soon as she heard of a factor which told her
that jurisdiction must be accepted and that there would therefore have to be an autopsy,
she was content to end the conversation. I think that would be standard procedure.
13.236 Second, no record was kept of the important instruction that Mr Revington must have
given in connection with PC King’s enquiry of Shipman. Record keeping was poor in the
office at that time and at all times until relatively recently.
13.237 Third, a system in which no fewer than three coroner’s officers took and passed
messages about the same case, without any understanding of why the death had been
reported, is not satisfactory. Mrs Evans spoke to Dr Pyburn and she came away from
that conversation with an imperfect understanding of why Dr Pyburn had reported the
death. She either spoke to the Coroner or put her report before him. Thereafter, she
had no further dealings with the case. Mrs Collins seems to have spoken to the Coroner
and conveyed a message to PC King that she was to check with Shipman. But she did
not know the background to the death and would have been unable to explain in detail
what was wanted and why. When PC King had seen Shipman, her report was passed
to yet another coroner’s officer, Mrs Blake, who had no knowledge of the case and who
was, like Mrs Collins, no more than a carrier of messages.
13.238 I have explained why I must also criticise PC King, although there exists substantial
mitigation for her failure to enquire fully of Shipman about the circumstances of
Mrs Overton’s collapse and the possible role of morphine.
13.239 I have explained in detail why I am critical of the work of Dr Bee. He failed to provide an
adequate report (oral or written) stating the extent of the findings he had been able to make
as a result of the autopsy and his examination of the clinical records. Instead, he provided
an incomplete oral report and a written report containing a conclusion that went far beyond
that which he could properly have advised. Neither his oral nor his written reports
addressed the issue of the administration of morphine.
13.240 I bear in mind when criticising Mr Revington that he has been unable to attend the Inquiry
due to ill health and has not been able to provide a detailed account of events in writing.
Even bearing that in mind, I feel compelled to criticise him for his failure to realise that PC
King’s report did not say whether Shipman had given any morphine and provided no
explanation for Mrs Overton’s collapse.
13.241 I must also criticise Mr Revington for his decision, on the manifestly inadequate
information available to him, not to hold an inquest. He had to consider whether there were
reasonable grounds to suspect that the death might not have been due to natural causes.
He could not rationally have reached the conclusion that there was no such suspicion and
that an inquest was not necessary.
333
SHIP03$$25 26-06-03 13:40:09 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
General Conclusions
13.242 I shall say nothing at this stage about the lessons that may be learned from this case about
the duty of doctors and other health professionals to report concerns or allegations of
misconduct or incompetence by a fellow professional.
13.243 The investigation undertaken by and on behalf of the Coroner in this case vividly illustrates
many of the shortcomings I have previously identified and lends support to the
conclusions I expressed in Chapters Seven, Eight and Nine.
13.244 The initial gathering of information was inadequate. The coroner’s officer who took the
report did not fully understand what had happened and why the death had to be
investigated. She had long experience in the job but no formal training and no medical
knowledge. She passed a very brief report to the Coroner, so his understanding was also
limited. Unusually, he gave an instruction for a further enquiry to be made but the
instruction was transmitted by a different coroner’s officer with no knowledge of the facts.
It is small wonder that PC King did not understand what she was enquiring about and
failed to ask vital questions of Shipman. No one obtained the medical records or returned
to Dr Pyburn for a better understanding of the background. No one in the coroner’s office
had the medical knowledge to appreciate the significance of the information which could
have been obtained. In short, the investigation from within the coroner’s office was
fragmented, uninformed and superficial.
13.245The provision of the pathologist’s opinion illustrates the shortcomings I have mentioned in
Chapter Nine. I have no reason to think that Dr Bee’s conduct of the autopsy itself was in
any material respect inadequate. However, his report was manifestly inadequate. He
provided no underlying cause of death and should have said that he was unable to do so.
Instead, he gave an unfounded opinion that the death was due to natural causes, thereby
giving the Coroner a way of avoiding an inquest. In Chapter Nine, I observed that there
appeared to be an expectation on the part of some pathologists and coroners that a death
would be ‘natural’ and that an inquest would be avoided. This is an example of a case
where such an expectation was clearly present.
13.246 The Coroner’s decision not to hold an inquest appears to have been based on the
pathologist’s oral report and the manifestly inadequate report of PC King’s enquiry. The
Coroner’s understanding of the background circumstances cannot have been other than
superficial. Nor can he have had any understanding of the medical issues involved. A
more thorough investigation was required but, even on the basis of the limited information
available, an inquest was plainly necessary.
334
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Tameside Registrars and the General Register Office
Introduction
14.1 One of the principal aims of the Inquiry has been to discover whether the various agencies
responsible for post-death procedures in Tameside were in any way to blame for not
detecting signs of Shipman’s criminal activities. Most of the deaths of Shipman’s patients,
including those whom he killed, were registered at the Tameside register office. It has
been necessary therefore to examine procedures and practices at the Tameside register
office, both generally and in relation to deaths certified by Shipman.
14.2 The first matter examined related to the number of Shipman-certified deaths registered at
the office. After his criminal activities were revealed, there were suggestions that the
registrars who registered those deaths should have noticed that they were registering an
excessive number of deaths which had been certified by Shipman. The Inquiry has
therefore examined the deaths registered by each registrar in order to ascertain whether
any pattern should have been evident.
14.3 Second, suggestions were also made that the registrars had in fact noticed an excess of
deaths among Shipman’s patients and had talked about this between themselves but had
failed to take any action or to draw their concerns to the attention of the appropriate
authorities. I have examined the evidence relating to these discussions and made findings
in relation to it.
14.4 Third, during the course of the evidence, there was criticism of certain procedures in
operation at the Tameside register office. It was necessary for me to consider those
procedures and, in particular, to decide whether they had had any effect upon the
registration of deaths certified by Shipman.
14.5 Finally there was criticism of the registration procedures adopted in a number of individual
cases. The Inquiry has examined those cases in order to ascertain how they were handled
and whether, if they had been handled better, Shipman’s activities might have been
noticed earlier. In two of those cases, the registrars acted on the advice of staff at the
General Register Office (GRO). It has therefore been necessary for me to consider
whether that advice was correct and, if not, how it came to be given.
Should the Frequency of Registration of Deaths Certified by Shipman Have
Been Noticed?
The Background
14.6 There are four registrars at the Tameside register office. Each is responsible for her own
register of deaths. In the absence of a full-time registrar, some registration work is carried
out by deputy registrars who usually do other administrative work. Registrars have other
duties besides the registration of deaths. No registrar sees the complete picture of death
registrations effected in the office as a whole. Nor is there any system in place (or indeed
any duty to operate such a system) for the gathering of statistics relating to deaths, let
335
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
alone for the monitoring of the deaths of a particular doctor. Although the identity of the
doctor who has certified the cause of death is recorded by the registrar, the name would
not be important unless a difficulty arose because, for example, the doctor had not
completed the MCCD properly. Unless the doctor frequently failed to complete MCCDs
to the registrar’s satisfaction, the name would be unlikely to stand out in her mind. Shipman
usually (although not always) completed MCCDs quite satisfactorily.
14.7 The Inquiry team collated the numbers of Shipman-certified deaths registered by two
current registrars and one former registrar from the commencement of their employment
until 1998. These three registrars had been responsible for registering the greatest
number of deaths certified by Shipman. The numbers were compared with the total
numbers of deaths registered by the registrars during the same period. Also, the Inquiry
team identified a number of short periods when the concentration of Shipman-certified
deaths registered by each registrar was at its highest. The object was to see whether,
during those short periods, the frequency of Shipman-certified deaths should have been
noticeable.
Miss Marilyn Partoon
14.8 Miss Marilyn Partoon registered 69 deaths certified by Shipman between 1988 and 1998.
During that period, she registered a total of 6734 deaths. Two three-month periods from
1996 and 1997 were analysed. These showed six Shipman-certified deaths out of a total
of 199 in the first period and seven Shipman-certified deaths out of 239 in the second.
Mrs Carol McCann
14.9 Mrs Carol McCann registered 71 deaths certified by Shipman between 1985 and 1998.
During that period, she registered a total of 8258 deaths. Three short periods were
analysed. The highest concentration was found to be four Shipman-certified deaths out of
a total of 95 during two months in 1996.
Mrs Dorothy Craven
14.10 Mrs Dorothy Craven registered 120 deaths certified by Shipman between 1978 and 1998.
During that period, she registered a total of 11,711 deaths. Four short periods were
analysed. I refer only to two. The two highest concentrations of Shipman-certified deaths
occurred during two months in April/May 1997, when she registered seven Shipmancertified
deaths out of a total of 113, and in a period of three and a half months in late
1997/early 1998, when she registered ten Shipman-certified deaths out of a total of 200.
Conclusion
14.11 I am quite satisfied that the frequency with which Shipman-certified deaths occurred
would not have been noticeable to any registrar. Nor, in my view, were the clusters of
greatest intensity particularly remarkable. Such research as the Inquiry team was able to
carry out showed that clusters of deaths certified by an individual doctor occur with
reasonable frequency.
336
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Had Any Registrar Noticed an Excess of Deaths Certified by Shipman?
14.12 All the registrars denied that they had in fact noticed an excess of deaths certified by
Shipman. There was some evidence that one or more registrars had made comments to
others from which it appeared that they had in fact done so. Three such incidents were
investigated.
Mrs Dorothy Craven and Miss Marilyn Partoon
14.13 In her Inquiry statement, dated 25th March 2002, Miss Partoon suggested that, prior to
August or September 1998, she had a recollection that Mrs Craven might have remarked
that ‘a lot of Shipman’s MCCDs were for old ladies’. Miss Partoon did not recall any
speculation arising from that remark. Mrs Craven has always said that she has no
recollection of the comment.
14.14 In evidence, Miss Partoon was adamant that the remark was made once the police
investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy was under way, at a time when a list
of relevant entries in the registers of death was posted on the wall of the storeroom at the
register office. That would have been no earlier than September 1998, possibly later.
14.15 The version of the incident given by Miss Partoon in oral evidence makes little sense in
that, once it was known that deaths certified by Shipman were under investigation (as they
were when the list of names was on the wall), any remark about the gender of Shipman’s
patients would have been wholly unmemorable. Moreover, it would have been a mere
observation, rather than an item of information, such as Miss Partoon originally suggested
she had been given. In my view, Mrs Craven probably did make a remark about the
predominant gender of Shipman’s deceased patients during one of the periods in which
she registered a cluster of deaths certified by him. However, the remark does not suggest
that Mrs Craven thought there was anything sinister about the gender distribution of the
deaths of Shipman’s patients.
Mrs Carol McCann and Mrs Margaret Burns
14.16 Mrs Margaret Burns worked at the register office as a clerk/receptionist. She sometimes
acted as a deputy registrar. She recalled an occasion when Mrs McCann commented to
her that a death was ‘another one of Shipman‘s’. This, she said, occurred soon after both
of them had been off work with ’flu and is likely therefore to have taken place in January/
February 1997. Mrs McCann apparently remarked that there had been two or three deaths
certified by Shipman in the past few days (two such deaths were registered on 5th
February 1997 and one had been registered on 29th January 1997). The conversation then
turned to the ’flu virus which was going around at the time. Mrs McCann did not seem
concerned. For some reason, Mrs Burns remembered Shipman’s name, although she has
told the Inquiry that she had not heard of him at the time. However, she was acquainted
with Mrs Margaret Walker, who was employed as a computer operator at Shipman’s
surgery.
14.17 Mrs McCann said that she has no recollection of the conversation. She suggested that she
might have made such a remark if she had opened an envelope containing an MCCD
when she had received other certificates from the same doctor very recently.
337
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
14.18 I think it likely that Mrs McCann made a comment along the lines suggested by Mrs Burns.
This may very well have occurred on 5th February, when she opened the second MCCD
from Shipman. I do not think that any significance can be attached to Mrs McCann’s
remark; it certainly does not suggest that she had noticed an abnormal number of deaths
certified by Shipman or that she was concerned about them.
Mrs Margaret Burns and Mrs Margaret Walker
14.19 In her Inquiry statement, Mrs Walker said that she used to chat to Mrs Burns on the bus.
She knew Mrs Burns worked at the register office and said that Mrs Burns knew that she
worked at Shipman’s surgery. She recalled that, one day, Mrs Burns asked her if there had
been a lot of deaths at the surgery. Mrs Walker replied that there had. She believes the
conversation took place prior to October 1996, during the winter; she says she attributed
the high level of deaths at the time to the ’flu vaccine. Mrs Burns denies that this
conversation took place. She says the most that could have happened is that she might
have said that they had had a lot of deaths at the registry.
14.20 The Inquiry has not heard oral evidence from Mrs Walker. However, the conversation was
related in the context of an account of her fluctuating awareness of the fact that there was
a high number of deaths at the surgery. She recounted how this conversation was the first
time that it occurred to her that there was a high number of deaths.
14.21 I think it likely that a conversation did take place between these two women about the
number of deaths occurring at that time. I think it most unlikely that Mrs Burns asked
Mrs Walker specifically about deaths among Shipman’s patients. I think it likely that she
was aware, probably from casual talk in the register office, that a lot of deaths had recently
been registered. I think it likely that her question was a general one and was not founded
upon any suspicion that there were more deaths among Shipman’s patients than among
those of any other doctor. I think it likely that Mrs Walker has remembered the conversation
because it was the first time she realised that there were a lot of deaths among Shipman’s
patients and this was something she was to notice from time to time over the next few
years.
Conclusion
14.22 There is no evidence from which I could reasonably infer that any of the registrars had
noticed an excess of deaths certified by Shipman or that they had any other concern
about him.
Procedures at the Register Office
14.23 I shall now consider three procedures which the Inquiry has heard occurred from time to
time at the Tameside register office and about which some concerns have been
expressed.
‘Mode of Dying’ Cases
14.24 I have already said in Chapter Six that the Handbook for Registration Officers advises that
modes of dying do not, on their own, positively identify a cause of death. If all information
338
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
recorded in Part I of the cause of death takes the form of a mode of dying, rather than a
cause of death, the death should be regarded as one where the cause of death is not
known and should be reported to the coroner. Examples of statements implying a mode
of dying include ‘respiratory arrest’, ‘respiratory failure’, ‘cardiac arrest’ and similar
expressions. If, however, the mode of dying is supported by a cause of death that would
not of itself be reportable, then the cause of death is acceptable. Mrs Jane West, registrar
for the Boston district and Training Officer for the Lincolnshire registration service, told the
Inquiry that, in her county, registrars were trained that, if a doctor had given a mode of
dying unsupported by an acceptable cause of death, the death should be reported to the
coroner, in accordance with the guidance contained in the Handbook.
14.25 The practice at the Tameside register office was, until recently, different. If the registrar
was not prepared to accept an MCCD because the supposed cause of death was, in truth,
a mode of dying, the registrar would telephone the certifying doctor to ask whether s/he
was able to amend the certificate by adding an underlying cause of death or to issue a
new certificate with an acceptable cause of death. As Mrs West pointed out, this is not
good practice, as it puts the registrar in the position where s/he might be tempted to
suggest (or be understood to be suggesting) to the doctor what to put on the MCCD. If
that were to happen, the MCCD, which is supposed to contain the doctor’s professional
opinion, would be without value. The basis of the system of certification would be
undermined.
14.26 The Tameside registrars explained to me how this practice began. If a registrar
telephoned the coroner’s office to report a death in which the cause of death was not
acceptable, instead of taking on the death for investigation, the coroner’s officer would ask
the registrar to contact the doctor in an attempt to resolve the problem. The registrars, who
would in some ways have preferred not to do this, agreed to do so because they felt they
were helping the deceased’s family, who might well become anxious if there appeared to
be a problem over the registration of the death. As the reaction of the coroner’s officer was
always the same, eventually the registrars took to telephoning the doctor themselves, after
checking with the coroner’s officer that a Form 100A had not already been issued. This
might have occurred if the certifying doctor had spoken informally to the coroner’s office
and had been given ‘permission’ to certify the death in the terms appearing on the MCCD.
14.27 It was common ground among other witnesses that the procedures operated at the
Tameside register office did not constitute good practice. Mr Christopher Dorries, HM
Coroner for South Yorkshire (West), said that he and his officers would not ask a registrar
to speak to a doctor about a ‘mode of dying’ problem. It is a matter for the coroner’s office
to deal with. One of his officers would contact the doctor, tell him/her that the MCCD was
not acceptable and ask the doctor to tell him about the death. If the doctor could explain
and justify an acceptable cause of death, the officer would say that it was up to the doctor
to write another MCCD and that the office would back that up with a Form 100A. Mr Dorries
would prefer that a second MCCD were issued so as to spare the family the trouble of
taking the original certificate back to the doctor for amendment. On occasions, he has
known a hospital to pay for a taxi to take a replacement MCCD to the register office.
14.28 Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner for Greater Manchester South District, said that, in his
District, the practice was rather different. On his instructions, the coroner’s officer would
339
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
suggest to the registrar that she should telephone the doctor and ask him/her to
telephone the coroner’s office. The purpose of that suggestion was not, he said, that
the registrar should seek to solve the problem, merely that she should put the doctor
in touch with the coroner’s office. That explanation does not make sense. If the registrar
is speaking to the coroner’s officer about an unacceptable MCCD, she is trying to report
the death to the coroner. It would be quite pointless for the coroner’s officer to ask the
registrar to ask the doctor to report the case. I reject that explanation. In any event, the
evidence of Mrs Mary Evans, who was employed in the coroner’s office from 1974 until
1999, latterly as first coroner’s officer, confirmed the evidence of the Tameside
registrars. I am quite satisfied that this poor practice was followed for many years, until
it was recently stopped.
14.29 Mrs West condemned this practice and observed that it rather looked as though the
coroner’s office was seeking to avoid taking responsibility for such cases. However,
another possibility is that the staff in the coroner’s office thought that the difficulty that
arose when a doctor gave a mode of dying, rather than a cause of death, was primarily
the registrar’s problem. It was the GRO who would not accept a mode of dying as a
cause of death; therefore, the registrar should speak to the doctor to sort out the
problem. Mrs Evans agreed that she regarded a ‘mode of dying’ as mainly the registrar’s
problem, although she added, rather less certainly in my view, that the coroner should
not accept a mode of dying as a cause of death either. Mrs Joan Collins, who was
employed at the coroner’s office from 1985 until 2002 and was first coroner’s officer
from 1999 until her retirement, said that such an attitude did not prevail in her day. She
did say, however, that the source of the information that the coroner’s office should no
longer allow doctors to issue MCCDs stating a mode of death only had been the register
office. I think it likely that Mrs Evans, at least, was of the view that it was up to the registrar
to sort out the problem if a doctor gave a mode of dying as a cause of death.
14.30 Whatever the reason within the coroner’s office, I am quite satisfied that the Tameside
registrars adopted this poor practice because the coroner’s office pushed responsibility
onto the registrars to sort out the problem of the defective MCCD. I accept that the
Tameside registrars agreed to take responsibility for obtaining a corrected or new MCCD
from the doctor in order not to cause distress for relatives, who would otherwise have been
left without an acceptable MCCD. In that case, the death would have had to be reported
to the coroner and an autopsy might have followed.
Conclusion
14.31 Although I do not regard this practice as acceptable, I do not think that, in Tameside, the
outcome of any individual case examined by the Inquiry would have been any different if
the correct procedure had been followed. If that had been done, the coroner’s officer,
rather than the registrar, would have spoken to the doctor, but the coroner himself would
never have done so. The coroner’s officer would have had no more expertise in medical
matters than the registrar and would have been no more equipped to handle such a
conversation satisfactorily. Both the registrar and the coroner’s officer would have been
quite unable to probe, question or challenge what the doctor said.
340
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
14.32 I mentioned in Chapter Six that the GRO had recently written to all registrars, giving
guidance about good practice in relation to a number of matters that have been explored
in the course of evidence given to the Inquiry. One of those matters related to the
procedures which I have just described. The circular, sent to all registrars, contained the
following instruction:
‘Registrars should refer to certifying doctors only apparent clerical
errors about the medical certificate of cause of death, such as the
omission of dates or signatures, possible misspellings or where
clarification of abbreviations is needed. Where it appears that a death
must be reported to the coroner, for example where the only cause given
is a mode of dying, it is for the coroner to discuss the cause with the
certifying doctor. Registrars should not address such matters directly
with the certifying doctor.’
14.33 A letter to all coroners, sent out at the same time, has made it clear that any discussion
with, or enquiries of, doctors should be conducted direct with the doctor, not through the
registrar.
Keeping of Written Records of Discussions
14.34 There is no written advice or guidance in the Handbook for Registration Officers about the
notes which registrars should keep of discussions with doctors, the coroner’s office or the
GRO. Miss Ceinwen Lloyd, Branch Manager Births and Deaths Registration at the Office
for National Statistics (ONS), said that GRO advice was that notes should be made of all
such discussions. However, it is not certain to what extent, if at all, that advice was
promulgated. The evidence suggests that it was the Tameside registrars’ practice to
record on the reverse of the MCCD any advice received from the GRO.
14.35 If there is a formal referral to the coroner, a record will exist on the counterfoil of Form 52.
However, as I have said, it appears that informal referrals have, in the past, been
preferred, not only in Tameside, but generally. If the referral is by telephone, there are no
clear rules as to whether and, if so, how a record should be made. If, as a result of the
referral, the coroner issues a Form 100A, this form will be retained in the register office and,
in due course, forwarded to the GRO as a record of the referral. However, if no Form 100A
is issued, there may be no record of the referral in the register office. Mrs West said that
she would always use the formal Form 52 procedure to refer a case to the coroner.
However, if that were not done, she would expect to see a record made of any informal
referral. Mrs Craven, now retired, said that she would have made a record in such
circumstances. However, I am by no means convinced that there is any standard practice.
14.36 The practice relating to cases resulting in the issue of an amended MCCD or a second
MCCD was not uniform. A Tameside registrar, Miss Partoon, said that, if in the end she
obtained an acceptable MCCD, she would not make any note of the procedures she had
gone through to get it. Another Tameside registrar, Mrs McCann, said that she would
usually write a note on an unacceptable MCCD if it were superseded by a second,
acceptable one. However, she would not do so if the first certificate were amended and
341
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
initialled by the doctor. Mrs West said that it was good practice to make a note of what had
occurred in both types of situation.
Conclusion
14.37 It is plain that there was uncertainty and lack of uniformity in the approach to the making
of notes within the Tameside register office. However, in the absence of any authoritative
guidance or advice on the topic, I am not critical of the individual registrars.
14.38 The recent circular sent to registrars, to which I have already referred, contains detailed
guidance on the written records that should be kept by registrars. In particular, registrars
are now advised that a note should be kept of any discussion with the coroner’s office
about a particular death and that, where an amended or fresh MCCD is issued, a note of
the circumstances should be made and clipped to the certificates when returned to the
GRO.
The Removal of Valid Medical Certificates of Cause of Death from the Register Office
14.39 The evidence showed that, on occasions, the Tameside registrars allowed an informant
to take an MCCD back to the certifying doctor for amendment. This happened, for
example, in the cases of Mrs Dorothy Andrew and Mrs Bertha Parr, to which I shall refer
later in this Chapter.
14.40 The Handbook for Registration Officers provides (at Section D2):
‘16. Except as provided in paragraphs 7 and 15, the registrar must not
part with a duly completed medical certificate without the Registrar
General’s sanction. He/She may, however, submit it on request to a
coroner on the understanding that it will be returned.’
14.41 The phrase ‘duly completed’ is ambiguous; it could mean ‘valid’ or ‘valid and
acceptable’. Mrs West took the view that a valid MCCD (even if not ‘acceptable’) should
not be released by the register office except to the coroner; even then, the practice of her
office is to send only a copy. Miss Lloyd observed that releasing an MCCD to an informant
was not advisable, although she could appreciate the registrars’ motives for doing so.
14.42 Miss Partoon said that she used to think that it would be acceptable to release an MCCD
if it was ‘not viable’ (i.e. not acceptable) and the death had not been registered. However,
she is now more careful and releases an MCCD only if a coroner’s officer has specifically
asked for the doctor to provide an underlying cause of death. In that event, she takes the
view that she is releasing an MCCD with the approval of the coroner. Mrs McCann also
believed that, in releasing an MCCD in those circumstances, she was doing so with the
implicit agreement of the coroner’s office. Mrs Craven had had no concerns about
releasing an MCCD during her time at the register office.
Conclusion
14.43 The guidance contained in the Handbook for Registration Officers is ambiguous. While the
reasons for the practice of not releasing an MCCD can readily be appreciated, the
342
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
registrars cannot be criticised for releasing valid, but unacceptable, certificates in the
circumstances in which this occurred. The practice appears to have arisen by reason of
the procedures operated between the register office and the coroner’s office for contact
with doctors.
Additional Duties for a Nominated Officer
14.44 In a register office where several registrars work, it is usual and approved practice for a
nominated officer to be appointed to carry out a range of administrative duties. This occurs
at Tameside, where the registrars take turns to be nominated officer for two weeks at a
time. At Tameside, the nominated officer carries out a duty that is not standard practice,
namely to screen all the MCCDs as they are brought in by informants. The nominated
officer will spot any potential problems and will try to resolve them before the actual
process of registration begins. The registration will be carried out, not by the nominated
officer, but by another registrar.
14.45 The Tameside registrars like this screening procedure because they say that it can be very
distressing for an informant to discover, part way through the process, that the MCCD is
not acceptable, so that the death cannot be registered on that day. If the problem is
spotted at an early stage, it might be possible to resolve it; if not, at least the informant will
be told before the process begins.
14.46 Miss Lloyd was concerned about this procedure because, she said, the registrar who is
to carry out the registration should be personally responsible for scrutinising the MCCD.
If a nominated officer has ‘passed’ it as acceptable, the registrar might not examine it as
carefully as s/he should and might not take full responsibility for the registration. Mrs West
expressed concerns of a similar nature.
14.47 The Tameside registrars said that they do examine the MCCD carefully even though the
nominated officer has seen it. However, I had the clear impression from the evidence of
one of the deputy registrars that she would rely primarily on the scrutiny of the nominated
officer. This is perhaps understandable in view of the fact that she would be significantly
less experienced than the nominated officer.
Conclusion
14.48 Miss Lloyd and Mrs West had concerns about this practice. However, provided that each
registrar understood that she bore ultimate responsibility for the registration and provided
that each exercised her own judgement in respect of the MCCD on which the registration
was based, it does not seem to me to be particularly objectionable. Having said that, in
paragraphs 14.65 and 14.69, I shall describe two occasions on which the knowledge that
the nominated officer had checked the MCCD caused the registrar who registered the
death to do something different from that which she might otherwise have done.
Individual Deaths
Registrars Liaising with Doctors
14.49 The Inquiry examined two deaths certified by Shipman which illustrate the procedure then
current in the Tameside register office, whereby the registrars, rather than staff at the
343
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
coroner’s office, liaised with doctors who had identified unacceptable causes of death.
The first death was that of Mrs Dorothy Andrew, which was a ‘mode of dying’ case. The
second, that of Mrs Bertha Parr, had been certified by Shipman as due to ‘natural causes’.
Mrs Dorothy Andrew
14.50 Shipman killed Mrs Dorothy Andrew on 12th September 1996. When he first issued an
MCCD, he certified the cause of death as renal failure. When Mrs Andrew’s family
presented this MCCD at the register office, the registrar would not accept it. She spoke to
Shipman and told him that it was not acceptable. The certificate was taken back to
Shipman’s surgery and he amended it, adding uraemia as the underlying cause of the
renal failure and stating that ‘old age’ was a significant condition contributing to the death
but not related to the disease or condition causing it. Mrs Andrew was 85. She had been
in quite good health until her death and was active up to the end. The registrar was not
certain whether to accept the amended certificate and telephoned the coroner’s office.
She then told Mrs Andrew’s family that the coroner was not satisfied and thought that there
might have to be an autopsy. This upset Mrs Andrew’s daughter. The registrar advised
that the family return to Shipman again. This time, Shipman issued a second MCCD, giving
the cause of death as renal failure due to uraemia and old age. This was accepted and
the death was registered.
14.51 This procedure was unsatisfactory in two respects. I have already said that the practice
whereby a registrar speaks directly to a doctor in an attempt to obtain an improved and
acceptable MCCD is undesirable. The first MCCD in this case was unacceptable and the
death should have been reported to the coroner. If anyone is to discuss an amended or
second MCCD with the doctor, it should be the coroner, not the registrar. However, for
reasons I have explained, I do not consider that the registrars who followed this practice
should be personally criticised.
14.52 The second unsatisfactory feature of this MCCD is that the causes of death Shipman gave
did not make medical sense. Uraemia is a condition in which there is too much urea in the
blood. It is caused by renal failure. So, uraemia is a consequence of renal failure, not a
cause of it. Anyone with medical training would have realised that. Registrars do not have
any medical training; they pick up some medical knowledge from their work. The registrar
who failed to realise that, even in its final form, this MCCD did not make sense is not to be
criticised. She did not have the training and expertise to know that. However, it is, as I have
already observed, a matter of concern that registrars are expected to scrutinise MCCDs
without the expertise necessary for the job.
14.53 What is even more a matter of concern is that the person in the coroner’s office who
advised the registrar does not appear to have realised that the causes of death advanced
by Shipman did not make medical sense. This does not surprise me, in that there was no
one in Mr Pollard’s office with any medical expertise or training. This case underlines the
need for MCCDs or their replacements to be scrutinised by someone with appropriate
training or expertise and with ready access to medical advice. Only if the person in the
coroner’s office had realised that this certificate was nonsense, could it have become
evident that this death should be investigated by means of an autopsy.
344
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Mrs Bertha Parr
14.54 Shipman killed Mrs Bertha Parr on 11th November 1997. She was 77. When Shipman first
completed the MCCD, he certified that the cause of death was ‘natural causes’. In the view
of Mrs West and Miss Lloyd, both of whose evidence I agree with and accept, ‘natural
causes’ should never be acceptable to the registration service as a cause of death. The
expression does not explain what has caused the death; it asserts only that the death was
due to a natural disease process. In Mrs Parr’s case, it appears that the nominated officer
or registrar telephoned Shipman and told him that the MCCD was not acceptable. It seems
that Mrs Parr’s son took the MCCD back to Shipman’s surgery and Shipman amended it
(and the counterfoil) adding ‘old age’ as the underlying cause of death. The MCCD was
then acceptable to the registrar and the death was registered.
14.55 I have said earlier that the practice which should have been followed was for the death to
be reported to the coroner on Form 52. However, it was common practice in the Tameside
register office for the registrars to seek to resolve problems of this kind without involving
the coroner. As I have said, I am satisfied that they did so out of a desire to assist the family
of the deceased and also because, if they contacted the coroner’s office, it is more than
likely that they would have been asked to contact the certifying doctor to see if s/he was
prepared to amend the certificate to make it acceptable. In any event, if the death had
been reported to the coroner, the coroner’s officer would have asked Shipman if he were
able to provide an acceptable certificate. He would have done so. The death would not
have been investigated and there would have been no autopsy. The outcome would have
been the same.
An Occupationally-Related Death
14.56 Concern was expressed about another death, where a registrar had failed to discover that
a death was or might have been occupationally-related and should, under the provisions
of regulation 41 of the Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987, have been
reported to the coroner.
Mr John Livesey
14.57 Shipman killed Mr John Livesey on 25th July 1997. On the MCCD, Shipman stated that the
death had been caused by renal failure. However, he gave hypertension as an underlying
cause of death and, with that underlying cause, renal failure is acceptable. Therefore, no
‘mode of dying’ problem arose. Shipman also stated that chronic obstructive airways
disease had contributed to Mr Livesey’s death. In the box below that (the ‘Spearing box’),
which allows the doctor to state that the death might have been due to or contributed to
by the employment followed by the deceased, Shipman had put no tick. It happens that
Mr Livesey had worked for many years in the ventilation industry and had been exposed
to asbestos. Mrs Joanne Livesey-Carter, Mr Livesey’s daughter, told the Inquiry that,
when she attended at the register office to register her father’s death, she was not asked
any questions about exposure to an industrial hazard.
14.58 I have already said in Chapter Six that some registrars, on seeing a death from lung
disease, make a practice of asking questions designed to discover whether the death
345
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
might have been occupational in origin. However, it does not seem that the practice is
universal. It may be that it is not always followed with a common disease such as chronic
obstructive airways disease. As I have explained earlier, the task of the registrar is
primarily to obtain factual information about the deceased from the informant and to
scrutinise the MCCD. I can well understand why, if the ‘Spearing box’ is not ticked, the
registrar assumes that there is no history of exposure to an industrial hazard. I have the
impression that if, when the registrar enquires as to the nature of the deceased’s
employment, s/he realises that it might have entailed exposure to an industrial hazard,
s/he will ask the informant whether or not it did and might then refer the death to the coroner
for investigation of whether the industrial hazard caused or contributed to the death.
However, I do not think registrars are trained that they must always investigate the
question of whether the deceased was exposed to a hazard.
14.59 In the present case, Mrs Livesey-Carter described her father’s occupation as ‘managing
director’, which indeed he was. Unfortunately, that would not have put the registrar on
enquiry as to the possibility that his employment had involved exposure to an industrial
hazard. Had the registrar asked questions and discovered that Mr Livesey had been
exposed to asbestos, it might be that the death would have been referred to the coroner
and that there would have been an autopsy. Whether that would have revealed that the
true cause of his death was morphine poisoning, I cannot say with confidence. For
reasons I have outlined in Chapter Nine, it is quite possible that the pathologist would have
found some other condition capable of explaining Mr Livesey’s death, in which case it is
unlikely that toxicology would have been carried out.
14.60 I do not think I could criticise the registrar for failing to ask Mrs Livesey-Carter more about
the nature of her father’s employment. I have little doubt that Shipman knew that
Mr Livesey had worked with asbestos and deliberately omitted to tick the ‘Spearing box’.
To do so would have been to invite the registrar to refer the death to the coroner, something
Shipman would certainly have wished to avoid.
Advice from the General Register Office
14.61 The Inquiry found two deaths where registrars at the Tameside register office had sought
advice from the GRO before registering the deaths. I have already explained in Chapter
Six that the GRO runs an advice line, manned by members of staff from the General
Section. Those members of staff have no medical background or expertise. They are
recruited from other sections of the GRO and externally. They are trained on the job. They
deal with written and telephone queries, ranging from simple enquiries from members of
the public to more complex medical issues raised by registrars. Queries from registrars
often relate to uncertainties over whether or not a death can properly be registered.
14.62 In order to assist them in answering queries, staff in the General Section have access to
an annotated medical reference book, the Handbook for Registration Officers, various
leaflets and internal files (known as ‘P’ Books) containing documents relevant to various
issues, including referral to the coroner. They also have access to ONS epidemiologists
in the event of complex medical enquiries; however, the evidence strongly suggests that
most queries, including those from registrars, are resolved by the clerical staff. The
registrar witnesses agreed that staff at the GRO are very approachable nowadays.
346
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
14.63 It does not appear that, within the documentation available to staff in the General Section
in 1996, there was any unequivocal written statement to the effect that ‘natural causes’ was
not an acceptable cause of death. Certainly, there was no such statement in the
Handbook for Registration Officers. However, the Inquiry was told that the ‘P’ Books
contained a letter, written by an ONS (then OPCS) epidemiologist in 1994 in response to
a query from a coroner. The letter indicated that doctors within the OPCS did not agree as
to the acceptability of ‘natural causes’ as a cause of death. The author of the letter said
that his own reaction would be to accept an MCCD with ‘natural causes’ as the cause of
death. He considered it to be ‘self-evidently within the ‘rules’’. Furthermore, he did not
regard it as any less clear a cause of death than ‘old age’. Anyone reading that letter might
well have understood that ‘natural causes’ was, or at least might be, acceptable as a
cause of death.
Mrs Erla Copeland
14.64 Shipman killed Mrs Erla Copeland on 11th January 1996. He certified that the cause of
death was ‘natural causes’. When the MCCD was presented at the Tameside register
office, it appears that Miss Partoon, as the nominated officer, telephoned the GRO to seek
advice about the acceptability of the cause of death. She recorded on the back of the
MCCD, ‘Checked with the GRO - Acceptable because of age’. Mrs Copeland was 79.
It is not known who at the GRO gave the advice. It appears that the adviser at the GRO
had taken the view that ‘natural causes’ could be equated with ‘old age’. Mr David
Trembath, the manager of the General Section since October 1996, was unable to shed
any light on how this advice could have been given. He suggested that, possibly, the
registrar had tried to report the death to the coroner but that the coroner or his officer had
been unwilling to accept it. In that event, the registrar might have sought advice from a
member of staff at the GRO, who might have advised that, in those circumstances, ‘natural
causes’ should be accepted. There is no evidence at all to suggest that that happened in
this case.
14.65 The death was registered by Mrs Craven. She said that, if she had not known of the advice
received from the GRO, she would have telephoned the coroner’s office. She would not
have made a formal report using Form 52. However, in view of the advice received from
the GRO, she registered the death. She said that it would not have occurred to her to
question advice from that source. I can well understand why. The giving of poor advice by
the GRO in this case is worrying, as such advice disseminates poor practice. Any registrar
hearing of such advice in one case would be likely to act upon that advice in other cases,
without further reference to the GRO. If the GRO gave this poor advice to Miss Partoon, it
is likely that it will have been given to other registrars all over the country.
14.66 I am not critical of Miss Partoon or Mrs Craven. I can well understand why they would
prefer to telephone the GRO, rather than to refer the death to the coroner.
14.67 If this case had been reported directly to the coroner, I do not think that the outcome would
have been significantly different from what in fact occurred. The likely outcome would
have been that the coroner’s officer would have requested the registrar to speak to
Shipman and ask whether he was able to provide a more specific cause of death.
347
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Alternatively, the coroner’s officer would have spoken to Shipman. I am quite sure that
Shipman would have obliged and would have thought of something to put on the MCCD.
Indeed, it is surprising that he had been so careless as to certify the death as due to
‘natural causes’; usually, he was careful to provide an acceptable (albeit untrue) cause.
As Mrs Copeland’s history did not reveal any obvious potential reason for her to die, I think
it likely that Shipman would have certified the death as due to ‘old age’. I think it most
unlikely that the coroner’s officer would have suggested to the coroner that he should take
jurisdiction over the case and direct an autopsy. Only by speaking to those who had seen
or spoken to Mrs Copeland shortly before her death could the coroner’s officer have come
to suspect that Mrs Copeland’s death was sudden and unexplained.
Mrs Marion Higham
14.68 Mrs Marion Higham died on 19th July 1996, at the age of 84. After reviewing all the
evidence relating to her death, I concluded that Shipman had probably killed her. He
certified that the cause of her death was ‘natural causes’. When the MCCD was presented,
Mrs Craven, as the nominated officer, telephoned the GRO to ask advice about the
acceptability of the cause of death. This is contrary to what she had said she would have
done in the case of Mrs Copeland, six months earlier. It may well be that she felt it
necessary to check with the GRO that the advice given then still held good. She recorded
the outcome of her conversation with the GRO on the back of the MCCD as follows:
‘SHEILA SIDES. GRO - ACCEPTABLE’.
14.69 Mrs McCann then registered the death. Her evidence was that she would not have
registered the death on her own initiative but did so in reliance on the advice of the GRO.
She said that, although she does not always accept the advice of the GRO as authoritative,
she did so on this occasion, probably because the advice had already been accepted by
the nominated officer.
14.70 Mrs Sheila Sides had worked at the GRO for several years but, in July 1996, had worked
on the advice line in the General Section for only a few weeks. It cannot have been she who
advised Miss Partoon in January 1996 in respect of Mrs Copeland. Mrs Sides said that, in
1996, the policy in respect of ‘natural causes’ was clear; it was not acceptable. She
suggested that her advice in this case could have been given as a result of a mistake or
misunderstanding by her.
14.71 It was suggested by Counsel for the GRO, and accepted by Mrs McCann, that Mrs Craven
might have spoken to the certifying doctor and the coroner’s office before approaching
the GRO. Mrs Sides suggested that one explanation for the advice that she gave might be
that the registrar told her that she had already spoken to the coroner, had been told that
the coroner was ‘not particularly interested’ (meaning that he did not want to take the case
on) but that Mrs Craven was still ‘unhappy’ with the cause of death. In that event, Mrs Sides
said, she would not have ‘overruled’ the coroner but would have told the registrar that she
could go ahead and register the death. Mr Trembath appeared to think that was a
possibility.
14.72 In my view, that suggestion does not make good sense for several reasons. First, if
Mrs Craven had spoken to the certifying doctor, the doctor either would have offered to
348
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
provide a more specific cause of death on a new or amended MCCD (in which case, the
death could then have been registered) or would have said that he could not identify a
specific cause of death, in which case, the death would have had to be reported to the
coroner. In practice, Shipman would have provided a more specific cause of death.
14.73 Second, it is highly improbable that Mrs Craven would have spoken to the coroner’s office
before seeking the advice of the GRO. It would not be logical to do so, unless the registrar
regarded the death as clearly reportable and the coroner would not accept jurisdiction. In
that event, there would almost certainly have been a note to that effect on the MCCD. There
was not. In any event, the evidence of Mrs Evans, Mrs Collins and Mrs Margaret Blake, the
coroner’s officers at the time, was that, if a registrar had reported a death said to be due
to ‘natural causes’, the coroner would have accepted jurisdiction. Finally, Mrs Sides’
suggested explanation would be wholly inconsistent with the note written on the reverse
of the MCCD that the cause of death was ‘ACCEPTABLE’.
14.74 Initially, Mrs Sides was adamant that the GRO policy towards ‘natural causes’ was so clear
and unequivocal that there would have been little room for mistake or misunderstanding.
She thought she could not have been confused by the letter in the ‘P’ file into thinking that
‘natural causes’ might be acceptable in some cases. However, she later conceded that
she might have been confused by the letter.
14.75 The fact that similar (wrong) advice was given on two occasions during 1996 makes it
unlikely that the GRO had a policy which was clearly understood by all staff in the General
Section on the acceptability or otherwise of ‘natural causes’. If such a policy did exist, it
would have been easy to understand and put into practice. The fact that no such policy
did exist (or was known only to some within the Section) may well be because the situation
did not arise frequently. No policy was written down and, indeed, the written material
which was available tended to suggest that ‘natural causes’ might constitute an
acceptable cause of death; at the very least, it would have confused the issue.
14.76 In the absence of a clearly understood policy, no criticism can be levelled at Mrs Sides
personally for her conduct in 1996. She may have given the advice on her own initiative,
misunderstanding the position. Alternatively, she may have sought guidance from others
who did not properly understand the position. Either way, she should not be blamed.
14.77 The suggested explanation put forward by Mrs Sides and Mr Trembath for the giving of
the advice causes some concern. Both Mrs Sides and Mr Trembath suggested that, if a
registrar was unhappy with the fact that the coroner was ‘not interested’ in taking up a case
and sought the advice of the GRO, the advice would be to register the death, even if (as
in the case of ‘natural causes’) the GRO believed the cause of death to be unacceptable.
This seems to defeat the purpose of a registrar seeking independent professional advice
from the GRO. Whilst, in the final analysis, it may be the case that there is little a registrar
can do if the coroner refuses to act on a referral, it would at least be open to the registrar
to take some further action, for example, by approaching the coroner personally or by
submitting a Form 52. It would have also been possible for the GRO to make
representations to the coroner on the registrar’s behalf. The evidence also suggests that
the GRO believes that coroners sometimes refuse to accept jurisdiction in deaths which
have not been properly certificated and yet the GRO does nothing about it. The priority
349
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
appears to be to ensure that registration takes place, rather than to ensure that a
satisfactory cause of death is established.
14.78 In respect of both the deaths examined, the Inquiry has been reliant on notes made by the
registrars concerned. No record was or is maintained by the GRO of advice given on the
acceptability of causes of death. In the light of the potential importance of the advice, this
appears poor practice.
Conclusions
The General Register Office
14.79 It appears that the problems which have arisen in relation to the advice given by the GRO
are caused in large part by a system whereby clerical staff without medical expertise are
seeking to advise other clerical staff on matters which are essentially medical in nature. If
the present system is to continue, it is apparent that improved training and guidance is
required for the staff who answer queries from registrars. Also, if the advice line were to
continue to operate in its present form, I would recommend that consideration be given to
ensuring that one person with medical expertise is available to answer queries relating to
the meaning or acceptability of a cause of death. However, if my recommendations for
reform are accepted, registrars will no longer be required to decide on the acceptability
of causes of death. For reasons I have already given, they are not properly equipped to
carry out this function.
14.80 The recent circular to registrars advised that, where a death is reported as being due to
‘natural causes’, either without any other underlying cause of death or with an underlying
cause of death which is also reportable, the death should be reported to the coroner. The
Handbook for Registration Officers has been amended accordingly.
The Tameside Registrars
14.81 The Tameside registrars cannot be criticised for following the wrong advice given by
the GRO.
14.82 As I have said, several of the procedures in operation at the Tameside register office were
less than ideal. I am not critical of the individual registrars, who had not received clear
training or guidance on the points of practice that arose. Nor had they any opportunity to
meet registrars from other areas to discuss variations in practice. Accordingly, they had
little opportunity to discover and correct any shortcomings in their own practice or to gain
the necessary confidence to insist upon the correct statutory procedures. Their position
was very different from that of Mrs West, who has had the advantage of exposure to
contact with other registrars and the benefit of an excellent training programme. The only
real opportunity afforded to the Tameside registrars to seek guidance on practice would
arise when an inspector visited. However, such occurrences are not frequent and the main
function of such a visit is for the inspector to satisfy him/herself that the registrar is
conducting him/herself in accordance with the rules. The inspector might or might not
discover an unorthodox practice during an inspection.
350
SHIP03$$26 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
14.83 In any event, none of the unorthodox procedures followed at Tameside had a serious
effect on the registration process. Nor would the outcome have been different in any of
the cases I have considered had the procedures been correctly followed by staff at the
register office.
14.84 Because of the fact that so many deaths certified by Shipman were registered at the
Tameside register office, procedures at the office have been subjected to close scrutiny
by the Inquiry. However, it is plain from the recent correspondence received from the
GRO, to which I have already referred, that the departures from best practice about which
the Inquiry has heard are not confined to Tameside. I welcome the advice and guidance
which has recently been issued to registrars and hope that, in the future, it will also be
possible to improve training facilities and opportunities for professional meetings for
registrars and deputy registrars employed throughout the registration service.
351
SHIP03P014 25-06-03 13:03:57 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Doctors Who Signed Cremation Forms C for Shipman’s
Patients
Introduction
15.1 Many of the patients whom Shipman killed were cremated. Two hundred and ninety two
cremation forms for deceased patients of his were obtained by the Inquiry, some dating
back to the period when he was in practice in Todmorden. I have explained the role and
duties of the Form C doctor in Chapter Eleven. In this Chapter, I shall consider the role of
the doctors who signed Forms C for Shipman’s patients.
Todmorden
15.2 While working in Todmorden, Shipman mainly used one doctor, Dr Stella Brown, to sign
his Forms C. Dr Brown was a former partner in the practice that Shipman had joined. She
signed nine of the ten certificates that survive from his time there. It is perhaps noteworthy
that she usually, but not always, made some enquiry of one or more of the persons
mentioned in questions 5–8 on Form C. The doctor who signed the remaining Form C
made a similar enquiry. This would tend to suggest that it was custom and practice in
Todmorden to make such enquiries. The form itself, unlike Forms C issued by some
crematoria, contained no requirement that such enquiries be made.
Hyde
The Clarendon House Doctors
15.3 Shipman worked at the Donneybrook Practice between October 1977 and August 1992.
During that period, he used the doctors from the two neighbouring Clarendon House
practices to complete his Forms C. There were about 12 doctors involved and the
numbers of forms completed by each doctor during this period were relatively few. During
this time (with the exception of Dr Peter Bennett in one case, which I will mention), none
of the doctors noticed anything unusual about Shipman’s Forms B.
The Brooke Practice Doctors
15.4 After moving to the Market Street Surgery in August 1992, Shipman continued briefly to
use the doctors from both Clarendon House practices. When the doctors from one of those
practices moved, in August 1993, and set up the Brooke Practice, Shipman asked those
doctors to complete his Forms C. The doctors who remained at the other Clarendon House
practice ceased to complete forms for him.
15.5 It was during this later period, and particularly from 1995 onwards, that the number of
deaths among Shipman’s patients increased significantly, as did the number of his
requests for Form C to be completed. The five Brooke Practice doctors, Dr Peter Bennett
(who left in 1996 and was replaced by Dr Linda Reynolds), Dr Alastair MacGillivray,
Dr Susan Booth, Dr Jeremy Dirckze and Dr Rajesh Patel, operated an informal rota, with
353
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
the Forms C being shared between them on a roughly equal basis. Each doctor would,
therefore, know that s/he was completing only about one in five of Shipman’s Forms C.
15.6 The Brooke Practice doctors did not seem to notice that Shipman appeared willing to
certify deaths that had occurred quite suddenly, in circumstances in which most doctors
would have thought it necessary to report the death to the coroner. Nor did they notice that
deaths often appeared to occur very shortly after Shipman had visited or that a large
number of his patients seemed to die alone. Only Dr Patel seems to have noticed that
Shipman had been present at more deaths than might have been expected. He
mentioned his observation to Shipman, who rebuked him, as I shall describe later.
15.7 A few months after Dr Linda Reynolds joined the Brooke Practice, on 1st September 1996,
she began to notice that she was being asked to sign cremation Forms C rather more often
than had been the case at her former practice. She also noticed that Shipman had on
several occasions been present at the death of the patient in question. She thought that
this was odd because, in her experience, the presence of a general practitioner at the
death of a patient was very unusual. She mentioned this to her partners towards the end
of 1997, but they advised her that Shipman had a lot of elderly patients and was well known
as a doctor who would visit his patients unannounced when he was concerned about their
condition. His presence at the deaths of his patients would not be surprising to them, for
these reasons.
15.8 In February 1998, Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, a funeral director, mentioned to Dr Booth that
she was concerned about the deaths of Shipman’s patients. Mrs Bambroffe said that she
had noticed the high number of deaths among Shipman’s patients, and that a lot of those
patients were elderly women who had died at home, often apparently alone; they were
found sitting up in a chair, dressed in day clothes and showing no sign of previous illness.
She had also noticed that Shipman seemed to have been present either at or shortly after
the deaths of many of them.
15.9 By late March 1998, the Brooke Practice doctors had decided to act. Some of them, but
especially Dr Reynolds, were very concerned by the number of deaths among Shipman’s
patients and the unusual features reported by Mrs Bambroffe. On 24th March, acting on
behalf of the Brooke Practice, Dr Reynolds reported their concerns to Mr John Pollard, HM
Coroner for Greater Manchester South. A police investigation ensued and that
investigation is the subject of my Second Report. Unfortunately, it failed to detect
Shipman’s criminal activities and it was closed on 17th April. Shipman continued to
practise and killed three more patients before his arrest in September that year, on
suspicion of the murder of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. As is now well known, he was later
convicted of the murder of 15 patients and the Inquiry has found that he killed at least 200
more over a period of 24 years.
Assessing the Performance of the Hyde Doctors
15.10 It has been and remains a matter of public concern that the systems of death and
cremation certification failed to deter Shipman or to detect his crimes. In the earlier
Chapters of this Report I have described some of the shortcomings of the systems, as
354
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
operated throughout the country over many years. In my First Report, I explained that
Shipman frequently gave dishonest and sometimes implausible accounts in cremation
Forms B which he completed for patients he had killed. In this Chapter, I shall consider
whether those doctors who undertook the duty of completing most of Shipman’s Forms C
ought to have noticed that something was amiss and done something about it. They might
have done so for a number of reasons: because of the numbers of forms they were being
asked to sign, because of the presence of unusual, possibly recurring, features of the
deaths or because, in any given case or cases, Shipman’s assertions on Form B were
internally inconsistent, inherently implausible or suggested that the death should have
been reported to the coroner.
15.11 There is no doubt that, with one or two exceptions to which I will refer, the doctors who
signed Shipman’s Forms C did not over many years notice any of these features. I shall
consider whether, if they had undertaken their duties more carefully, they would have
noticed them. I shall also consider whether they should be criticised for their failure to
notice them.
15.12 During Stage Two, oral evidence was given by the ten doctors who signed most of the
Forms C for Shipman. In this Chapter, I shall call them ‘the Hyde doctors’.
Forms B
15.13 In the case of each of the Hyde doctors, the Inquiry examined the frequency with which
and the usual circumstances in which s/he completed a Form B for one of his/her own
patients and the standard to which s/he completed the forms. I formed the view that the
Hyde doctors were all conscientious when completing Forms B. Typical cases in which
they certified the cause of death and completed Forms B were very similar. The death was
expected, the patient had been ill in bed and died either in a nursing or elderly persons’
home or at home with family or carers in attendance. Those are just the circumstances in
which one would expect a doctor to be in a position to certify the cause of death and
complete and sign a Form B. He or she would be able to combine his/her direct knowledge
of the medical condition of the patient with the carers’ or family’s account of the
circumstances of death, in order to furnish the information required.
15.14 Such circumstances are very different from those of many deaths for which Shipman
completed Forms B. Although he would often falsely suggest that the death was expected
or that a relation or friend was present at the moment of death, Shipman would also
frequently complete a Form B for the death of a patient who had died suddenly and
apparently alone. Shipman would often admit that he had been present at the death; the
other doctors were present at the deaths of their patients only on very rare occasions. He
would often admit a visit on the day of the death, sometimes just an hour or so before the
death. This might be understandable if it happened, from time to time, in the case of a
chronically ill patient whom he was visiting frequently and for whom hospital admission
would be of no value. It would not be readily understandable otherwise, especially if no
one was available to care for the patient at home. In other cases, Shipman apparently had
to estimate the time of death of the deceased, no one having been present around the time
of death to provide him with that information.
355
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Training and GeneralAttitude towards Forms C
15.15 The Inquiry sought to discover from each Hyde doctor the extent of any education or
training s/he had received in the completion of cremation forms and his/her perception of
the role of the Form C doctor. Most said that they had received no training or guidance of
any kind and it was apparent that most of them had not, until recently at least, ever properly
applied their minds to the purpose of the Form C procedure. Most did not perceive that
part of the purpose was to provide an independent check on the Form B doctor. To the
extent that they did appreciate this, they did not regard the chance of wrongdoing by the
doctor as anything other than theoretical. To the extent that they were checking on the
Form B doctor, it was, they believed, only to ensure that s/he had not made a bona fide
error of judgement in diagnosing the cause of death. Enquiries made by the Inquiry have
revealed that this attitude amongst the Hyde doctors was also prevalent among doctors
from other areas. Some of the Hyde doctors said that they regarded the Form C procedure
as a pure formality with no real purpose. It was just ‘form-filling’. This attitude goes a long
way to explain why those doctors did not feel it necessary to approach the task in a more
critical and analytical way. As I have already explained in Chapter Eleven, I am sure that
this attitude was far from unique to Hyde.
The Practice when Signing Forms C for Shipman’s Patients
15.16 Although the Hyde doctors signed Forms C for doctors other than Shipman in the early
years, those who moved to the Brooke Practice rarely, if ever, did so after the move. The
opportunities for comparison with the practice of other doctors was, therefore, limited. This
set Dr Reynolds’ experience of completing Forms C apart from that of her colleagues at
the Brooke Practice.
15.17 All described a similar process, which they followed when completing Forms C for
Shipman. Usually, Shipman would visit the Form C doctor in his/her surgery and would
give a very full oral account of the deceased person’s medical history and the events
leading up to the death. Sometimes, Shipman would have the medical records with him
but not as a rule. In any event, even if he had them, he never offered to show them to the
Form C doctor and the Form C doctor did not ask to see them. Sometimes, Shipman would
take the completed Form B with him and hand it to the Form C doctor. Quite often, Shipman
left the completed Form B and the blank Form C at the premises of the funeral director. In
that situation, the Form C doctor would not be in a position to read what Shipman had put
on Form B until s/he went to see the body, some time after his/her conversation with
Shipman. Even if Shipman handed the Form B directly to the Form C doctor, the latter
would not usually read it before or during the conversation. Shipman would give far more
detail orally than he had written on the Form B. Some time after this meeting, not
necessarily on the same day, the Form C doctor would attend the premises of the funeral
director, examine the deceased’s body, look at the Form B (if s/he had not already done
so) and complete and sign Form C. In the overwhelming majority of cases, no enquiries
would be made of the deceased’s family, carers or other persons.
15.18 The Form C doctor would regard the oral account, rather than the written account on Form
B, as the definitive account. Shipman was well respected by his professional colleagues
356
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
in Hyde, who trusted his word. Shipman appears to have been a plausible historian who
always gave a very full and persuasive account of events. He would rely upon his
reputation as a caring, old-fashioned doctor, who knew what was best for his patients and
who believed firmly in their right to choose to remain at home rather than be admitted to
hospital. He might allude to conversations that he had had with the coroner or coroner’s
office about how his preparedness to certify the cause of some deaths had been
approved. I have no doubt that, on every occasion when Shipman had killed a patient who
was cremated, he delivered his account of the patient’s medical history and the
circumstances of death in a forceful and convincing way.
15.19 Moreover, I believe that, because the Hyde doctors themselves would not certify the
cause of any death or sign a Form B unless satisfied that they knew the cause of death,
they always proceeded on the assumption that Shipman operated in the same way;
because he was prepared to sign a Form B, the death in question was a ‘natural’ death of
which he knew the cause. In this respect, the approach of the Hyde doctors is not unusual;
indeed, I think it is probably almost universal. I have already said that the system of death
certification has always relied on the integrity of a single doctor. Although, for cremations,
the existence of the Form C doctor is supposed to introduce an additional and
independent check (for which the Form C doctor should not merely accept the Form B
doctor’s word), it is clear that, for decades, Form C doctors have done little more than
endorse the Form B doctor’s view. That is one of the reasons why the Brodrick Committee
recommended the abolition of the Form C procedure.
15.20 In these circumstances, it is easy to understand how, when Shipman gave them a false,
but reasonably plausible, oral account of the death, the Hyde doctors readily accepted it
and were prepared to complete Form C. However, in my view, they were nevertheless
under a duty to read Form B carefully and to ensure that it was consistent with the account
they had been given orally. It appears to me that some of the Hyde doctors cannot have
undertaken this task as carefully as they ought. Some of them admitted that they had not
done so. Others thought that they had read Form B carefully but could not explain how it
was that they had failed in some cases to observe some strikingly unusual feature or
inconsistency.
15.21 Form C requires that the doctor should state that s/he has seen and carefully examined
the body. It follows that that should be done. In good conditions, a thorough examination
of the body can be very useful in detecting signs of violence or neglect. As part of the
independent investigation of the death and a check on the Form B doctor, it may have a
useful role to play. Some of the Hyde doctors regarded the examination of the body as a
mere formality. I think most of them carried this out in a cursory way. They considered,
perhaps not unreasonably, that a thorough examination was unlikely to reveal very much
to confirm or refute the cause of death. Provided that they saw nothing inconsistent with
the cause of death, as stated on Form B, they were content. However, I do not criticise
them personally for that. I consider that, in this respect, the Hyde doctors were no worse
than countless of their colleagues elsewhere in the country. Moreover, even the most
thorough examination of the body of a patient whom Shipman had killed would have
revealed no cause for suspicion. The doctor might have noticed an injection mark on the
hand or at the elbow, but that would not be unusual and would almost always be capable
357
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
of innocent explanation. If asked about it, Shipman would have been able to give a
plausible explanation; indeed, on occasions when he knew that the lethal injection had left
a mark he would pre-empt any questions by proffering an explanation to the family. For
example, he did this just after he had killed Mrs Vera Whittingslow on 24th June 1997. I
have little doubt that he would have given a similar explanation to the Form C doctor, had
the issue arisen. He might well also have made a record to support it, had it been the
practice for the Form C doctor to examine the medical notes.
15.22 The Form C issued by the Dukinfield crematorium (in contrast to that issued by some other
crematoria) does not require that the doctor should answer any of questions 5–8 in the
affirmative. The form contains a marginal note requiring affirmative answers to questions
1, 2 and 4. In effect, it was sufficient for the Form C doctor to discuss the death with the
Form B doctor and examine the body. As a result, with just three exceptions that I will
mention in due course where the doctors spoke to nurses or carers, none of the Hyde
doctors ever made any enquiry of family, carers or others who might have been in a
position to confirm or refute the account of Shipman, as a Form B doctor. Given that they
did not perceive that their role was to check on the Form B doctor, this is perhaps not
surprising. On the occasions when they did, it seems quite possible that they did so as a
result of a chance or unrelated meeting with those carers or nurses to whom they spoke.
Moreover, as I have already explained, it happens only very rarely elsewhere in the
country that a doctor makes any such enquiry unless Form C expressly requires him/her
to do so.
15.23 In my judgement, the general approach of the Hyde doctors to their Form C role, like the
approach of a large proportion of doctors practising elsewhere in the country, was not
appropriate. The raison d‘etre of the Form C doctor is that s/he should seek to reach an
independent opinion as to the cause of death. Doctors should not merely accept and
endorse the view of the Form B doctor. They should carry out a careful examination of the
body and they should not adopt the practice of never making enquiries of third parties. It
might be argued with some force that this is apparent from the statements and questions
in Form C and, in particular, questions 5–8. It might also be argued that a doctor who finds
him/herself repeatedly in the position of giving the same negative responses to questions
5–8 should question whether his/her approach to the task in hand is correct. That such an
approach was commonplace had long been recognised by the Home Office and others.
Nevertheless, I observe that the profession as a whole was never instructed to change the
approach that was commonly taken. It would not be fair to single the Hyde doctors out for
criticism on account of their approach.
Form C Certification by the IndividualDoctors
15.24 Having said that I will not criticise the Hyde doctors for their general approach to their Form
C duties, I now turn to consider whether they should be criticised for their performance in
connection with Forms C for Shipman’s patients. I have to consider, in relation to each
Hyde doctor, whether there were numbers or patterns of deaths or unusual, possibly
recurrent, features of the deaths that should have been noticed and acted upon by
him/her. I shall also consider whether, by checking carefully what Shipman had written on
Form B, the Hyde doctors should have noticed unusual features or inconsistencies
358
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
between what Shipman had written and what he had told them. I shall also consider
whether they should have noticed other circumstances that would or should have
concerned them.
15.25 I remind myself that, in considering the way in which a Hyde doctor carried out his/her
duties, it is only fair to bear in mind the dynamics of the relationship between that doctor
and Shipman. I have said that Shipman was well respected by his colleagues. He was not
well liked. Some of his colleagues found him prickly and arrogant; some, particularly the
younger ones, found him intimidating. Some of the Hyde doctors said that they would have
found it impossible to express any doubt about Shipman’s opinion. I can understand that.
It is asking a great deal of a young general practitioner to adopt a critical and analytical
approach to the opinion of an older, respected and dominant colleague.
15.26 In deciding where criticism should fall, I apply the standard of the reasonably competent
and conscientious general practitioner. In setting and applying that standard, I take into
account all the relevant background considerations already described. This is not a
straightforward exercise, not least because the position of the Hyde doctors, who had
portrayed to them as natural such a large number of unexpected deaths, is clearly very
unusual.
15.27 Finally, I will consider whether, if the Hyde doctors had performed their duties more
carefully, Shipman might have been detected earlier.
15.28 In considering this last issue, I must bear in mind that, if a Form C doctor feels any concern
about the opinion of the Form B doctor as to the cause of death or considers that the
circumstances require a report to the coroner, his/her available courses of action are
limited. He or she can decline to complete Form C and can suggest to the Form B doctor
that it would be appropriate to report the death to the coroner. He or she would assume
that the Form B doctor would accept that suggestion but would not check to ensure that
s/he had done so. If a Hyde doctor had refused to sign one of Shipman’s Forms C, there
would have been nothing to prevent Shipman from taking the Form C to another doctor
who might have less exacting standards. Alternatively, Shipman might well have gone
away and returned later, saying that he had spoken to the coroner, who had approved the
cause of death. It would then be very difficult for the Form C doctor to do anything other
than to complete and sign the form. Only if the Form C doctor became positively
suspicious of the Form B doctor (as opposed to thinking that s/he ought not to certify in
the individual case) would s/he think of taking matters into his/her own hands by making
a personal report to the coroner or the police.
15.29 Throughout my analysis of the work of the individual doctors, it should be assumed (unless
I say to the contrary) that each doctor had had no training in the purpose or completion of
cremation forms and that his/her experience of completing Forms B for his/her own
patients was as I have described above. It should also be assumed that his/her
experience of completing a Form C for Shipman was as I have described at paragraphs
15.17 and 15.18.
15.30 I shall consider the Hyde doctors in alphabetical order.
359
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Dr Norman Beenstock
15.31 Dr Norman Beenstock was registered as a medical practitioner in 1956. He commenced
work in general practice in about 1961 and in 1968 was appointed a principal at one of the
Clarendon House practices, where he remained until his retirement in 1993.
15.32 Between 1980 and 1993, Dr Beenstock signed 18 Forms C for Shipman; that is one or two
per year. There were no clusters of deaths. He could not have been expected to notice an
excess of deaths and, in fact, only six of the deaths were unlawful killings. These occurred
between 1983 and 1989. Shipman admitted that he was present at two. On both
occasions, Shipman claimed that another person had also been present. Although
Shipman’s presence should have been regarded as unusual, I have no doubt that
Shipman would have given a plausible explanation and, since the two deaths in question
were about three years apart, I would not expect Dr Beenstock to notice or be concerned
by this feature. I also note that Dr Beenstock’s own practice was to do some ‘chronic
visiting’ of patients who were unwell or infirm, but not to such a degree as to require them
to live in a nursing or elderly persons’ home.
15.33 In relation to the other unlawful killings, Shipman said that he had visited each patient
within a few hours before the death. I observe that no such deaths followed immediately
upon a similar one and the time periods between each were considerable. There is no
reason why Dr Beenstock should have noticed any unusual pattern of conduct.
15.34 Mr Percy Ward was 90 years old, very ill and receiving nursing care from the district nurse
in the period leading up to his death in 1983. Shipman was called out to see him because
of a worsening in his condition. The mode of death was said to be coma and death was
said to have occurred in the presence of his wife and daughter. These features would have
been typical of the normal case in which a doctor might be expected to call often in the
period leading up to death and in which it would be quite natural for him to have left the
patient at home, because hospital admission would serve no useful purpose.
15.35 On the Form B for Mrs Deborah Middleton, whom Shipman killed in January 1986,
Shipman gave various timings, which are internally inconsistent and confusing.
Dr Beenstock said that he must have noticed these and probably believed that Shipman
had made a mistake or was himself confused about the times. He had not thought that
there was any cause for suspicion and noted that Mrs Middleton’s granddaughter was
present at the death. He had had the impression that the death was expected. I am not
sure that Dr Beenstock did notice the inconsistent timings. If he did, he should, strictly
speaking, have had them corrected. But, if he noticed them at a time when he was not with
Shipman, I can understand why he did not trouble to do so. They would not of themselves
have seemed suspicious. I do not criticise Dr Beenstock for failing to ensure that they were
corrected.
15.36 Dr Beenstock also failed to notice a mistake in a date on the Form B for Mrs May Hurd,
whose death was not an unlawful killing. The error, if noticed, would not have aroused
suspicion.
15.37 Except for a brief period at the beginning of his career, Dr Beenstock never made any
enquiries of persons other than the Form B doctor. On the occasions when he had done so,
360
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
he told the Inquiry that he had found the process ‘unrewarding in every way’. I note that, if
Dr Beenstock had spoken toMrs Middleton’s granddaughter, he would have found outthat
she had not been present at the death and was most surprised bythe death. If Shipman had
told that lie and been discovered, Dr Beenstock would have been most disturbed. If
Shipman had not been abletotellthat lie (because he knewthat the Form C doctor was likely
to question the granddaughter) and had said that Mrs Middleton died alone, Dr Beenstock
would have been more likely to suggest a referral to the coroner. I say this, not as a criticism
of Dr Beenstock, but to demonstrate the importance of cross-checking the certifying
doctor’s story with someone independent of him/her, such as a relative.
15.38 There is no other case on which I need to pass comment. Although Dr Beenstock’s
practice as a Form C doctor did not fulfil the intention of the legislation, he performed his
duties in much the same way as many other doctors did and still do. I do not criticise him.
Dr Graham Bennett
15.39 Dr Graham Bennett was registered as a medical practitioner in 1954. In 1965, he and two
partners set up practice in Clarendon House, Hyde, where he remained until his retirement
in 1989.
15.40 Between 1981 and 1989, Dr Bennett completed 14 Forms C for Shipman, of which four
were unlawful killings. Five of the 14 deaths occurred in 1985, but three of them were
natural deaths and the Forms B for the other two give no cause for concern or suspicion,
even with the benefit of hindsight. Otherwise the deaths were well spread in time. I do not
think Dr Bennett could have been expected to notice any excess of deaths.
15.41 Of the four unlawful killings, Shipman admitted that he was present at only one death,
which occurred in 1986. He suggested that others were also present and the account on
Form B was not such as to arouse concern. In relation to the other three unlawful killings,
Shipman said he had visited each patient on the day of death. In the cases of Mrs Selina
Mackenzie, Mr Albert Cheetham and Mrs Elsie Harrop, the facts suggested by Form B,
which Shipman would no doubt have elaborated upon, are consistent with the picture of
an ailing patient who was either being supported at home or receiving follow-up visits from
Shipman. Some Forms B had omissions or internal inconsistencies. However, none of
these was of any great significance and Dr Bennett should not be criticised in respect of
his failure to ensure that they were corrected. In two cases, Shipman had purported to
estimate the time of death by reference to the temperature of the body. As I have said in
my First Report, he was unable to do this but I accept that he created the impression that
he knew how to do it and that some of his colleagues believed that he had had some
forensic training. In any event, even if a fellow general practitioner doubted Shipman’s
ability to make such an estimate, I do not think s/he would have regarded it as more than
a harmless boast.
15.42 Dr Graham Bennett is not to be criticised.
Dr Peter Bennett
15.43 Dr Peter Bennett was registered as a medical practitioner in 1966. In 1972, he was
appointed a principal at one of the Clarendon House practices. In 1993, he moved with
his partners to the Brooke Practice, where he remained until his retirement in 1996.
361
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
15.44 Between 1981 and 1996, Dr Bennett signed 33 Forms C for Shipman. Fifteen of those were
unlawful killings. Although the annual rate increased slightly during the 1990s, the
increase was not such that I would expect Dr Bennett to have noticed it.
15.45 Shipman admitted his presence at sixdeaths, although at only one did he admit to being
alone with the patient. Two of these deaths occurred within a year of each other. Mr Fred
Kellett died in December 1985 and Mrs Mary Tomlin in October 1986. Both were said to
have died as the result of a heart attack. In fact, Shipman killed them both. Shipman
claimed that neighbours were present at Mr Kellett’s death and a home help at
Mrs Tomlin’s. With the benefit of hindsight, it may appear that Dr Bennett should have
noticed that Shipman had been present at two rather similar deaths within a fairly short
time. However, he did not do so and I am not critical of him. The suggested presence of
other persons at the deaths would have mitigated any potential concern that might have
arisen, and, in each case, I am sure that Shipman would have explained how he had been
called out in an emergency to treat a dying patient. However, I draw attention to these two
cases as examples of the potential usefulness of an enquiry of an independent person. If
Dr Bennett had tried to contact the neighbour who had supposedly been present at the
death of Mr Kellett, he would have failed, as there was almost certainly no one else there
besides Shipman. Similarly, if Dr Bennett had contacted either of Mrs Tomlin’s home
helps, he would have found that neither of them had been present at the death and that
both were extremely surprised at the suddenness of the death. One of them, Mrs Dorothy
Foley, would also probably have mentioned Shipman’s bizarre behaviour around the time
of the death, which has been described fully in my First Report.
15.46 Dr Bennett completed a Form C for Mr James Wood, who died in December 1986.
Shipman certified the death as due to old age. Careful examination of Form B suggests
circumstances not consistent with the gradual decline of a frail elderly person. Dr Bennett
agreed that these features should have struck him as strange. However, as he said,
Shipman would have emphasised the patient’s frailty. He agreed that it appears that, after
hearing Shipman’s account, he did not read the Form B with great care. I do not single him
out for criticism in this respect because, as I have already explained, I am quite sure that
very many doctors rely almost exclusively on the oral account given by the Form B doctor.
15.47 On the Form B for Mr Walter Tingle, whom Shipman killed in November 1988, Shipman
said that he and a warden were present at the death. Dr Bennett must have read this form
carefully as he noticed that Shipman had misstated the date of death and Dr Bennett
corrected it. He also said in evidence that he noticed that the death appeared to be very
sudden. Shipman had written on Form B that Mr Tingle had died of a coronary thrombosis
following a collapse shortly after Shipman’s arrival. Dr Bennett said that he told Shipman
that he could not sign Form C and that the case should be reported to the coroner, as it
was a sudden death. Shipman was not pleased. However, he told Dr Bennett that he had
already spoken to the coroner who had said that he could certify. Dr Bennett was then
prepared to accept the situation and completed Form C. He said that he found Shipman’s
claim credible, as the coroner had sometimes allowed Dr Bennett himself to certify the
cause of a sudden death. It is not possible to discover whether Shipman ever did speak
to the coroner, or even to the coroner’s officer, as no records were made at the coroner’s
office of that kind of discussion. However, this case illustrates the false sense of certainty
362
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
that a ‘discussion with the coroner’ can give to what is in fact a wholly unreliable cause of
death. Dr Bennett said that he would have regarded acceptance of the cause of death by
the coroner as ‘the gold standard’. I am not critical of Dr Bennett for his conduct in respect
of this death. Indeed, I note that Dr Bennett was the only Form C doctor who reported
having ever suggested to Shipman that he would not sign a Form C. At this time,
Dr Bennett was a senior general practitioner and was certainly not intimidated by
Shipman.
15.48 I must consider the case of Miss Ethel Bennett, who died only a month after Mr Tingle. The
Form B in her case should have rung alarm bells for Dr Bennett. On the first page, Shipman
said that Miss Bennett had died of bronchopneumonia at about 4pm. He had last seen her
alive about sixhours before her death. Yet, on the next page, he also said that he had seen
Miss Bennett himself at 1pm, that a neighbour had heard her moving about at 3pm and
that her son had found her dead, seated in a chair, at 6.30pm. He said that she had been
in a coma for ‘hour only’. She had not been nursed before death and no one had been
present at the death. This account is riddled with inconsistency and implausibility. It is
unusual to die of bronchopneumonia after less than about two days’ serious illness. Death
can be more sudden but such an event is rare and the diagnosis of bronchopneumonia
after so sudden a deterioration would not be an obvious one; it would require confirmation
by autopsy and histology. Dr Bennett said that he thought Shipman must have said
something quite convincing and that he, Dr Bennett, cannot have read the form carefully
enough. I have no doubt that Shipman did say something that sounded plausible. But, in
my view, the information given in Form B was such that Dr Bennett should have refused to
sign Form C, however persuasive Shipman might have been. I think that Dr Bennett failed
in his duty as the Form C doctor in this case. This death should have gone to the coroner
for autopsy. It may be that, having challenged Shipman only a month earlier, Dr Bennett
was reluctant to take him on again.
15.49 There are three other cases worthy of mention, although I shall not criticise Dr Bennett in
respect of them. On the Forms B for Mrs Eileen Robinson and Mrs Edith Scott, Shipman
had entered coronary thrombosis as the sole cause of death. He did not suggest that
either had been suffering from any underlying heart disease. Each had died alone and had
been found some time later. On the face of each Form B, there was insufficient information
for Shipman to have diagnosed the cause of death. However, I am quite sure that he would
have provided a detailed history of heart disease, which I have no doubt Dr Bennett would
have believed. I do not criticise him for failing to ensure that the supposed underlying
disease was entered on Form B. In fact, Mrs Scott’s medical records showed no sign of
heart disease. Nor did Mrs Robinson’s, although she did suffer from hypertension. In
relation to the death of Mrs Elsie Lewis, who died in Charnley House elderly persons’
home, Dr Bennett stated on Form C that he spoke to the staff at the home. Mrs Lewis was
not killed by Shipman, who certified that the cause of her death was ‘senility’ and that her
mode of death was coma lasting 24 hours. Although it is possible that Dr Bennett
telephoned or called at the home with Mrs Lewis’ case specifically in mind, it is equally
possible that he had, by the time he signed Form C, already discussed her death with the
staff when attending another patient at the home, enabling him to make the relevant entry
on Form C that he later made. In any event, it was not his practice in his capacity as Form
C doctor to discuss the circumstances of the patient with family, nurses, carers or others.
363
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Dr Susan Booth (formerly Maclure)
15.50 Dr Susan Booth was registered as a medical practitioner in 1982. In 1985, she became a
principal at one of the Clarendon House practices. In 1993, she and her partners moved
to the Brooke Practice, where she remained until her retirement in 2000.
15.51 Between December 1987 and April 1998, Dr Booth signed 41 Forms C in relation to deaths
of patients of Shipman. After four deaths in the period 1987–1989, Dr Booth then signed
no forms until 1993. She signed seven in that year, three in 1994, seven in 1995, eight in
1996 and 1997 and four in the first four months of 1998. As she knew that the Forms C for
Shipman were being shared equally among the Brooke Practice partners, she must have
realised that Shipman had a large number of deaths in his practice. However, I think that
she and her partners were not alarmed by this but thought that the explanation was that
he had a lot of elderly patients on his list. It is now known that no fewer than 29 of the 41
patients for whom Dr Booth signed Forms C had been killed by Shipman.
15.52 In 12 of these 29 cases, Shipman stated on Form B that he had been present at the death.
Three of those deaths occurred within four months of each other in 1993 and all three
occurred at about the same time of the early afternoon. Shipman said he was alone with
Mrs Amy Whitehead when she died of a myocardial infarction on 22nd March 1993. He said
that he and a mobile warden were present when Mrs Nellie Mullen died from the same
cause on 2nd May 1993. He said he was alone with Mrs Jose Richards when she died of
left ventricular failure on 22nd July 1993. Dr Booth had not completed any other Forms C
for Shipman during this period. Dr Booth had never been present at the death of any of her
patients. Yet she says that she did not notice anything unusual about these deaths. In my
view, she should have done. Even taking into account that she, like other doctors, would
start from the assumption that all was in order, I consider that this cluster of deaths was
such that, at any rate by the third one, she should have noticed their unusual features. I
am not suggesting that she would immediately have thought that Shipman was doing
anything wrong. However, I do think that these cases should have caused her to be more
alert if similar cases or clusters of cases arose in the future. Dr Booth herself completed
20 Forms B in relation to her own patients between 1989 and 1994. She was present at
none of those deaths.
15.53 Had Dr Booth noticed the cluster in the spring/summer of 1993, it would not have been
long before she should have noticed that Shipman was present, apparently with members
of the family, at another death, that of Mr Charles Brocklehurst, on 31st December 1993.
Then, on two occasions within three months, in March and June 1995, Shipman was again
present at deaths, again apparently in company with others. Given that, by that time,
Dr Booth had never been present at the death of a patient in 13 years of practice, the fact
that Shipman had been present at sixin just over two years should, I think, have been
noticed and mentioned to Dr Booth’s partners, as an unusual feature. Dr Booth said that
she did not notice these features. Of course, it is possible that she did not read the Forms
B and that Shipman did not mention that he had been present at the deaths.
15.54 In June 1996, Dr Booth signed Form C for another death at which Shipman was present,
that of Mrs Margaret Vickers. On Form B, Shipman stated that Mrs Vickers died of a stroke,
after being in a coma for ‘minutes’. He said that he had attended upon her for 30 minutes
364
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
before her death. He and ‘a neighbour’ were present at the death. When asked about this
death at the Inquiry, Dr Booth agreed that it was most unusual for a patient to die so
suddenly from a stroke. She agreed that, standing alone, Form B did not make sense. She
could not imagine what Shipman could have told her in his oral account but agreed that,
if he had given a convincing story (which I think he probably did), she cannot have
correlated it to the entries on Form B and cannot have read Form B as carefully as she
should. She maintained that, at the time, this death had not struck her as strange. She
agreed that she had accepted the clinical history without having exercised any
independent clinical judgement about the death. If Dr Booth had scrutinised Form B
carefully, and if she had borne in mind that this was yet another death at which Shipman
was present, I think she would not have felt able to sign Form C. Alternatively, she might
have decided that she had to seek some independent corroboration of the circumstances.
Had she done so, she would have learned that there had in fact been no neighbour
present at the death.
15.55 There was another cluster of unusual deaths in 1997. In January, February and June,
Dr Booth signed Forms C in respect of three further deaths at which Shipman admitted
having been present. In relation to a fourth death, that of Mrs Eileen Crompton, he
admitted presence ‘immediately before death’ and seeing the body ‘about two minutes
after death’, admissions which, taken together, are tantamount to an admission of
presence at death. On 6th January 1997, Dr Booth signed Forms C in relation to the deaths
of Mrs Crompton and Mr David Harrison, who had died on 2nd and 3rd January 1997,
respectively. The circumstances of Mrs Crompton’s death were most out of the ordinary.
Enquiries of the staff at Charnley House residential home for the elderly, who were said to
have been present at Mrs Crompton’s death, would have revealed that Mrs Crompton had
died immediately after having been given an injection by Shipman and that before giving
the injection he had said that it was intended to ‘kick-start’ her heart and would either ‘kill
or cure’ her. Dr Booth should have been alarmed to hear that and should have insisted on
finding out what the drug was. Examination of the medical records would have shown that
Shipman claimed to have given benzylpenicillin, which was not a drug which could be
said to ‘kill or cure’ or to be capable of ‘kick-starting’ the heart. The fact that Mrs Crompton
had died so quickly after its administration would have been remarkable and most
worrying. Dr Booth could not then have signed Form C. There would have had to be an
inquest.
15.56 Mrs Lizzie Adams died on the afternoon of 28th February 1997. Shipman certified that the
cause of Mrs Adams’ death was bronchopneumonia with no underlying cause. He said
that he had attended her during her last illness for just half an hour. Form B says nothing
about calling an ambulance to take her to hospital. Shipman said that the mode of death
was syncope lasting ‘minutes only’. Mrs Adams had not been nursed during her last
illness. Shipman and a ‘neighbour’ were said to have been present at the death. This
Form B does not make sense. It is hard to imagine what Shipman could have told Dr Booth
to make her think the death was due to bronchopneumonia. She should have refused to
sign the Form C in this case. Of course, Shipman might have said that he had already
spoken to the coroner. Whilst I do not criticise Dr Booth for not speaking to ‘the
neighbour’, who was supposed to have been present at the death, that was certainly one
365
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
of the options that was open to her if she had been in any way concerned about the
frequency with which Shipman was present at the deaths in question. Had she done so,
she would have heard a most astonishing account from Mr William Catlow, which would
have been quite inconsistent with the notion that Mrs Adams had bronchopneumonia or
that her death was in any way expected. Mrs Adams had done active housework on the
day of her death.
15.57 Four months later, Mrs Whittingslow was to die, according to Form B, of a stroke which
apparently came on during Shipman’s presence at her home and killed her within 15
minutes. Although her husband was also said to have been present, the fact that this was
effectively the fourth death in Shipman’s presence in such a short time ought to have
struck Dr Booth. I do consider that Dr Booth should have felt increasingly puzzled about
the frequency with which Shipman was present at deaths. I do not think that she did feel
any such puzzlement until concerns were raised by others in early 1998.
15.58 There are also other individual Forms C about which, in my view, Dr Booth might have felt
concern. Mrs Marion Higham died in July 1996. On the Form B, Shipman certified the
cause of death as ‘naturalcauses’. That is not an acceptable cause of death; it is not a
cause of death at all, only an assertion that the death was natural. The registrar should not
have accepted it, although she did so on the advice of the General Register Office (see
Chapter Fourteen). Nor should Dr Booth have ‘confirmed’ natural causes as a cause of
death on Form C. She should have asked Shipman to provide a proper cause of death
and, if he could not do so, to report the case to the coroner. Dr Booth suggested that
Shipman might have said that he had reported it to the coroner and that is possible. If he
did, I can understand why Dr Booth would be prepared to sign Form C. However, Shipman
did not record the fact that he had done so on cremation Form B.
15.59 In the case of Mrs Dorothy Andrew, who died in September 1996, the causes of death,
renal failure, uraemia and old age, did not make good medical sense. Shipman stated on
Form B that the coroner had approved the cause of death and Dr Booth said in oral
evidence that Shipman would sometimes say that he had spoken to the coroner about a
death. I can understand why Dr Booth let it pass, although she should have noticed the
cause of death. Shipman might well have spoken to the coroner or at least to the coroner’s
officer. The death was reported to the coroner by the registrar and it seems highly likely –
if not certain – that Shipman was contacted by the coroner’s office (see, again, Chapter
Fourteen). If he did speak to the coroner’s officer, he must have pulled the wool over her
eyes. Shipman had certainly killed Mrs Andrew.
15.60 In the other cases examined by the Inquiry, I am satisfied that Shipman gave a plausible
explanation of the deaths and that Dr Booth should not be criticised for not noticing
internal inconsistencies in the Forms B.
15.61 That Dr Booth signed the Forms C in respect of Mrs Vickers and Mrs Adams and that she
failed to observe the frequency with which Shipman was present at the deaths in the three
clusters to which I have referred, reflects that which she admitted in oral evidence, namely,
that she invariably accepted the clinical history from Shipman without having exercised
any independent clinical judgement about the death. Whilst it may be that many Form C
doctors do accept without hesitation what they are told by their Form B colleagues, I am
366
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
afraid that I must criticise Dr Booth individually for her failure to observe the clusters of
deaths from 1993 and for signing Forms C in respect of Mrs Vickers and Mrs Adams.
Dr Jeremy Dirckze
15.62 Dr Jeremy Dirckze was registered as a medical practitioner in 1983. In 1989, he became
a partner in one of the Clarendon House practices, succeeding Dr Graham Bennett. He
moved with his colleagues to form the Brooke Practice in 1993.
15.63 Between 1990 and 1998, Dr Dirckze signed 44 Forms C for Shipman. Of these 44 deaths,
25 were unlawful killings. In the years 1990 to 1994, Dr Dirckze signed only between one
and three Forms C each year. However, in 1995, 1996 and 1997, he signed ten forms in
each year and he signed five in the first half of 1998. Dr Dirckze said that he did not notice
the increase. He said that, if he had perceived it subconsciously, he would have ascribed
it to the fact that, since the Brooke Practice had been set up, the Forms C were being
spread between fewer doctors than previously. That was so, but rationally considered, it
could not account for the increase. First, the move to the Brooke Practice had occurred in
1993 and had not been followed by any increase in 1994. Second, the increase in 1995
was larger than could be explained by a halving of the number of doctors signing the
forms.
15.64 Given that he knew that Shipman’s Forms C were spread between the five Brooke Practice
doctors, I think Dr Dirckze could reasonably have been expected to notice that Shipman
had a large number of patient deaths. Dr Dirckze maintained that he did not notice the
large number either in 1995 or in the ensuing years. He thought that he might have had a
vague feeling that there was a discrepancy between the numbers of deaths in the
respective practices but nothing more. He said that when the numbers were drawn to his
attention by Dr Reynolds, he saw what he thought was the explanation. He thought
Shipman had a lot of elderly patients and preferred to keep them at home rather than admit
them to hospital. Also, he believed that Shipman was a ‘hands on’ doctor who, if called
out, would take over the function of the ambulance service, for example by undertaking
resuscitation procedures himself. It follows that, although I think Dr Dirckze should have
noticed the increase in the number of Forms C he was signing for Shipman, I do not think,
if he had, he would have realised that there was anything sinister about the numbers. I
accept that he would have found what seemed to be a rational explanation.
15.65 Of the deaths for which Dr Dirckze signed Forms C, Shipman admitted his presence at
only four deaths, spanning sixyears, and said that he was alone with the deceased at only
one. That feature, although unusual, would not arouse suspicion when spread over a long
period. The one case in which Shipman said that he had been alone with the deceased
was that of Mrs Dora Ashton, who died in Shipman’s surgery. Although Dr Dirckze
recognised that a surgery death was unusual, one such death had occurred at the Brooke
Practice, so a single surgery death would not have struck him as strange. Nor do I think
that Dr Dirckze should have been expected to take particular note of the other deaths at
which Shipman admitted he had been present; there were not many such deaths and
Shipman claimed that other people had also been present.
367
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
15.66 The particular recurrent feature of the deaths for which Dr Dirckze signed Forms C was
that Shipman frequently stated on the Forms B that he had been present shortly before the
death had been discovered. In 1995, Shipman admitted that he visited, on the day of their
deaths, no fewer than nine patients for whom Dr Dirckze signed Form C. Three of those
deaths were natural; each patient was suffering from a terminal illness and visits on the
day of death would not be unusual. During the following two and a half years, there were
fewer cases in which Shipman admitted having attended on the day of death and again
there was a proportion in which the death was natural and the recent attendance
explained because of prolonged illness. In such cases the mode of death was most
commonly said to have been coma of some hours’ duration.
15.67 There were, however, also cases in which Shipman had apparently recently departed the
home of a patient who had not suffered prolonged illness and who was to die a sudden
death, apparently soon after his departure. In such cases, it appeared that Shipman had
left the patient alone at home, in circumstances where most doctors would have made
arrangements for admission to hospital. I would expect a doctor to regard that kind of
situation as unusual and somewhat worrying. It is not the picture that appears from
Dr Dirckze’s Forms B; of 25 of his Forms B considered by the Inquiry, he had been present
on the day of death of only three patients and all three died either in a nursing home or in
the presence of a district nurse. It would appear from Shipman’s Forms B that he had not
provided appropriate treatment or made suitable arrangements for the patient. I accept
that, in such cases, Shipman might have been able to tell a plausible tale. Perhaps the
patient was being cared for, but not strictly speaking nursed, by a relative or neighbour.
Perhaps the patient wanted to remain at home. Perhaps the patient, whom other doctors
might have persuaded to go into a nursing home, could remain living at home because of
the high level of care that Shipman was prepared to give. In particular, in the Forms B for
Mrs Erla Copeland and Mrs Valerie Cuthbert, one can discern what might have formed the
basis of such a tale. However, I must look to see whether clusters or patterns of such cases
exist in order to assess whether Dr Dirckze should be criticised for having failed to observe
them as unusual.
15.68 There were three unlawful killings where Form B recorded circumstances of this type in
January and March 1995. I note that Shipman suggested (falsely) that Mrs Alice Kennedy
was being nursed by her daughter and, since she lived in sheltered accommodation and
had an alarm with which she could summon the warden, Dr Dirckze might reasonably
have understood that, although she had died alone, Mrs Kennedy had not been
‘abandoned’ by Shipman. Similarly, although they were not said to have been present at
the death, ambulance personnel were said to have provided information to inform
Shipman’s views as to the mode and duration of death of Mrs Vera Brocklehurst. Such
extenuating circumstances were not suggested by the Form B relating to the death of
Mr Joseph Shaw. However, I would accept that Dr Dirckze might reasonably not have
been concerned by this cluster.
15.69 More such cases occurred in 1996. Between January and May, there were three cases in
which the death apparently occurred shortly after a visit by Shipman. In each case,
Shipman claimed on Form B that the patient was alone at the moment of death. In the case
of Mrs Copeland, who died in January, Shipman certified on Form B that the cause of
368
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
death was ‘naturalcauses’. That is not an adequate cause of death. Dr Dirckze agreed
that he ought not to have confirmed that as the cause of death on Form C, as he did.
Shipman stated that he had seen Mrs Copeland about two hours before her death and had
seen her body about ten minutes after death. He claimed that the mode of death had been
‘syncope’ lasting ‘seconds’, that this was based in part on statements made by
Mrs Copeland’s neighbour and sister-in-law, that no one had nursed Mrs Copeland during
her last illness and no one had been present at the moment of death. It is not possible to
guess what Shipman had in mind as the ‘last illness’. Form B gives no clue as to the cause
of death. Dr Dirckze said that he must have equated ‘natural causes’ with ‘old age’. That
is possible, as Shipman stated on the MCCD and initially wrote on Form B that
Mrs Copeland was 89 when she died; in fact she was 79. Dr Dirckze admitted that he
would have been ‘guided by Dr Shipman’. This demonstrates clearly that Dr Dirckze did
not carry out an independent check, as he should have done. Dr Dirckze should not have
signed Form C in this case. Mrs Jane Shelmerdine died in February and Mrs Cuthbert,
whom I have already briefly mentioned, died in May. In Mrs Shelmerdine’s case, Form B
suggested that she suddenly collapsed two to three hours after Shipman’s departure.
15.70 In December 1996 and February 1997, there were two further cases in which Shipman
stated on Form B that the death had occurred soon after he had visited. In both cases, the
deceased was alone at the death. In my view, by this time, Dr Dirckze should have
observed the pattern of these unusual cases. Then, between May and September 1997,
there were three more such cases. The first was that of Mrs Doris Earls, who was found
dead on the sofa in the afternoon of 21st May. Shipman, who certified that the death was
caused by a cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension, claimed on Form B that
Mrs Earls had been suffering from hypertension for over two years. He claimed that he had
seen her about three hours before her death. He did not explain on Form B what he then
discovered which enabled him to certify that Mrs Earls had had a fatal stroke after his
departure. If Mrs Earls was displaying symptoms of a stroke when he saw her, it would
appear from Form B that Shipman must have left her without care; if she was not displaying
any symptoms, it is hard to see how Shipman could have been sufficiently confident of the
cause of death to enable him to certify it. It is possible that Shipman told Dr Dirckze that
he had left Mrs Earls in the care of her husband. Dr Dirckze might well have accepted that.
However, sudden death from a stroke is fairly rare and I would expect Dr Dirckze to have
noticed that. Had he tried to speak to Mr Earls, he would have found that Mr Earls suffered
from Alzheimer’s disease and was usually cared for by his wife. Further enquiries would
have revealed that Mrs Earls was fit and well only about two hours before her death was
discovered.
15.71 The second of these three deaths, that of Mrs Nancy Jackson, occurred on 1st September
1997. Although Shipman said on Form B that Mrs Jackson was being nursed by her
daughter, he also suggested that she had been seen by a neighbour in a coma one hour
before her death and that no one had thereafter seen her. I can see that Shipman probably
gave a plausible explanation for the fact that Mrs Jackson was alone at the moment of
death. However, the third death in this group, that of Mrs Mavis Pickup, which occurred
only three weeks later on 22nd September, should have caused Dr Dirckze real concern.
According to Form B, Mrs Pickup died of a stroke at about 4pm and was found by a
369
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
neighbour some time later. Shipman claimed that he had treated Mrs Pickup for ‘4–6
hours’ before her death but he did not say what underlying illness had caused her stroke.
He stated that he had last seen her alive about four hours before her death. On Form B,
he said nothing about what signs he had then observed which would have enabled him
to diagnose a stroke as the cause of death. As with Mrs Earls, it is not clear whether
Mrs Pickup was then showing signs of a stroke (in which case it is strange that Shipman
left her alone without care) or whether she was not (in which case it is hard to see how
Shipman could have diagnosed the cause of death with sufficient confidence). Even if
Shipman told Dr Dirckze a plausible tale, as I accept he probably did, Dr Dirckze should
have realised that this apparently sudden death from a stroke was remarkably similar to
that of Mrs Earls.
15.72 Dr Dirckze said that it did not strike him that in these cases Shipman was not giving his
patients appropriate care. He said that he felt slightly intimidated by Shipman, who was
very dominant when he came across to the Brooke Practice Surgery with a Form C.
Shipman was quite firm that his was the correct way of treating patients and I can easily
understand why Dr Dirckze said that he would have found it very difficult to question his
opinion. I think Dr Dirckze was in awe of Shipman. He told the Inquiry that he accorded
‘ultimate credibility’ to the account given by the Form B doctor. As I observed in Chapter
Eleven, if the Form C procedure is to be effective, the doctor completing it must be
independent of the Form B doctor. But s/he must also have sufficient confidence to
criticise the actions and opinion of the Form B doctor where appropriate. It is clear that
Dr Dirckze was unable to do this because he was in awe of Shipman.
15.73 The death of Miss Ada Warburton warrants special mention. Miss Warburton was killed by
Shipman on 20th March 1998 and Dr Dirckze signed her Form C on Monday, 23rd March.
The partners in the Brooke Practice had met to discuss their concerns just three or four
days earlier. Form B, which is internally inconsistent in many respects, suggests that
Shipman and a neighbour were present around the time of Miss Warburton’s death.
Miss Warburton was said to have died of a stroke for which Shipman had first treated her
at about 12.30pm that day. When asked about the circumstances in which he came to sign
this Form C, Dr Dirckze said that he would have been persuaded by Shipman of the
truthfulness of the account given. He said that he also knew that the partners had agreed
that steps be taken to ensure that enquiries would be made into Shipman’s practice. As I
have explained in the Second Report, I think that, in the late afternoon or early evening of
that day, Dr Dirckze decided to extract from the practice records the comparative figures
showing how many Forms C the partners had signed for Shipman in the previous months
and how many MCCDs they had signed in the same period. I also think that Dr Dirckze
specifically mentioned Miss Warburton’s death to Dr Reynolds. Miss Warburton’s name
found its way into Dr Reynolds’ aide memoire that was recovered after her death by her
husband. In these circumstances, Dr Dirckze should not be criticised for signing
Miss Warburton’s Form C.
15.74 Dr Dirckze said that he never found it necessary to speak to anyone independent of the
Form B doctor. However, I note that he did in fact speak to District Nurse Dorothy Clegg
about the death of Mrs Annie Webb in 1991. Mrs Webb died as the result of pancreatic
cancer and I decided that Shipman played no part in her death and authorised the Inquiry
370
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
team to close the case. District Nurse Clegg was not said to have been present at the
death of Mrs Webb, although she had apparently seen her shortly before her death, when
Mrs Webb was in a coma. Dr Dirckze seems to have spoken to District Nurse Clegg and
Shipman together and it is likely that there was some discussion as to Mrs Webb’s decline
in the period leading up to her death. I think it unlikely that this meeting took place
specifically with Mrs Webb’s Form C in mind. It is far more likely that it was a chance
meeting at which Mrs Webb’s death was discussed.
15.75 Had Dr Dirckze made it his usual practice to speak to a relative or to the person that
Shipman said had been present at the death, he would sometimes have found that
Shipman’s account was inaccurate or untrue. I do not criticise him individually for failing
to adopt this practice, however, because it is a failure he shares in common with a very
large number of doctors.
15.76 In summary, I am critical of Dr Dirckze in connection with the Form C that he signed
relating to Mrs Copeland. I am also critical of his failure to observe the number of deaths
for which he signed Forms C where the patient had died alone soon after a visit by
Shipman. In my opinion, he should have observed this by about early 1997 and should
have been more seriously concerned after the death of Mrs Pickup in September 1997.
Had he been, he might well have reacted more positively when Dr Reynolds mentioned
her concerns to her partners in the autumn of 1997 and when Dr Booth communicated
Mrs Bambroffe’s concerns in February 1998.
Dr Stephen Farrar
15.77 Dr Stephen Farrar was registered as a medical practitioner in 1971. In 1973, he became
a principal in one of the Clarendon House practices, where he remained until 1991. Since
1993, he has worked as a local general practitioner, as a partner in a practice in
Openshaw, Manchester and as the director of a deputising service.
15.78 Between 1981 and 1991, Dr Farrar signed 23 Forms C for Shipman. These were equally
spread over the years and there was no time when Dr Farrar should have noticed that the
number of deaths among Shipman’s patients was high or increasing. Nine were unlawful
killings. According to the information on Forms B, from 1984, Shipman was present at no
fewer than seven deaths. In four cases, Shipman said he was alone with the patient at the
time of death. As I have said, the presence of a general practitioner at a death is unusual;
for the doctor to be alone with the patient is very unusual indeed.
15.79 Dr Farrar signed Form C in sixcases between July 1981 and November 1983. Shipman
did not say that he was present at any of these; nor was any an unlawful killing. There were
two cases in which he stated on Form B that he had visited on the day of death but both
patients were receiving nursing care for chronic or terminal illness and the mode of death
was prolonged, lasting 12 or 24 hours. Thus, in each case, the profile of the patient was
such as to make it readily understandable that the general practitioner should visit and yet
not arrange hospital admission, despite the fact that the patient was to die a few hours
later.
15.80 Mrs Gladys Roberts died on 8th February 1984. She was the first patient in relation to
whose death Shipman admitted, on Form B, that he had been present at the death.
371
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Shipman said that Mrs Roberts had died of a pulmonary embolus due to a deep vein
thrombosis (DVT). He claimed that he had seen her 12 hours before death, but that would
seem unlikely as the death occurred at 4pm; Shipman is unlikely to have seen the patient
at 4am. Shipman went on to state that, in the afternoon when she died, he had also seen
her 10 to 15 minutes before her death, had diagnosed her condition and had gone away
to call an ambulance and arrange hospital admission. When he returned within ten
minutes, she had died. He said he was present at the death. There are internal
inconsistencies in Form B but not such as would, of themselves, give rise to suspicion or
concern. However, the story as recounted on Form B is implausible. Had Shipman
attended Mrs Roberts for a DVT in the middle of the night, Dr Farrar would have expected
Shipman to admit her to hospital or, at the very least, make arrangements to ensure that
she was appropriately cared for. Dr Farrar said that he could not imagine what story
Shipman could have given to satisfy him that it was appropriate to certify the death as
Shipman had. He said that he would have trusted Shipman’s word as to his clinical
findings and the circumstances of death. My view is that, if Shipman did tell a plausible
and acceptable tale, Dr Farrar cannot have checked it against Form B. I would not go so
far as to say that Dr Farrar should have refused to sign Form C in this case but I think the
circumstances should have concerned him and should have made him more alert to any
unusual circumstances in the deaths for which he was later asked to sign Form C.
15.81 Mrs Mary Winterbottom died about seven months later, on 21st September 1984. Shipman
stated on Form B that he had last seen her alive two days before her death. She was known
to suffer from heart disease. He attributed the death to a coronary thrombosis. He said that
he had found her collapsed on the bed and had attempted resuscitation but this had
failed. Shipman was present at the death. Mrs Winterbottom had, Shipman claimed, been
seen by her niece two hours earlier, when all had been well. The effect of this account is
that Shipman had just happened to arrive at the house soon after Mrs Winterbottom had
collapsed. Dr Farrar said that he would have relied on Shipman’s oral account of the death
and did not notice anything unusual about the circumstances. It may be that Shipman told
Dr Farrar that he had been summoned in an emergency. However, Dr Farrar agreed that
he cannot have looked carefully at Form B. Had he done so, he could not have been
satisfied that Mrs Winterbottom had died as a result of a coronary thrombosis. He also
stated in oral evidence that it would be very, very rare for a general practitioner to be
present at two deaths in a year. I observe that, in neither Mrs Roberts’ case nor
Mrs Winterbottom’s case was anyone else said to be present at the death. Again, I would
not go so far as to say that Dr Farrar should not have signed Form C in Mrs Winterbottom’s
case but I think the circumstances should have made him more alert to any unusual
circumstances in the deaths for which he was later asked to sign Form C.
15.82 Shipman admitted that he was present at another death, that of Mrs Ellen Higson, in
February 1985, only five months later. This was one of three deaths occurring in 1985 for
which Dr Farrar signed Form C; neither of the other two was the result of unlawful killing.
Shipman certified that the death of Mrs Higson was due to renal failure. He claimed that
he had been attending her in her last illness for two weeks, that she was not being nursed
and that she died after being in a coma for ‘hours only’. He and the home help were
present at the death. Dr John Grenville, a general practitioner who gave evidence in Phase
372
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
One, advised the Inquiry that it would be most unusual for a patient with renal failure not
to need nursing care and Mrs Higson was, of course, said to have been in a coma.
Dr Farrar did not think that the circumstances of this death would have aroused his
concern. I think that must be because he just did not think carefully about the
circumstances but accepted Shipman’s account uncritically. He should not have signed
Form C. Had he spoken to the ‘home help’ (who was in fact an elderly lady who visited
Mrs Higson to do errands and help in the house) or to Mrs Higson’s daughter, he would
have learned that Mrs Higson had not been diagnosed as suffering from renal failure and
had not been expected to die.
15.83 In January 1986, Dr Farrar signed one Form C in respect of a patient at whose death
Shipman said he was not present. Between September 1986 and January 1988, Dr Farrar
signed Forms C for five more deaths, at three of which Shipman admitted on Form B that
he had been present. Dr Farrar agreed that he should have felt some concern about the
death of Miss Mona White, who died on 15th September 1986. She was only 63; she died
in Shipman’s presence, supposedly of a coronary thrombosis. Shipman stated that he was
with her for 30 minutes before her death but made no reference on Form B to any attempt
to resuscitate her or admit her to hospital. Dr Farrar said in evidence that he is now
surprised that Shipman had not admitted Miss White to hospital. Once again, it does not
appear that Dr Farrar gave sufficiently careful consideration to the circumstances of the
death.
15.84 Dr Farrar said he was now also surprised that Shipman did not appear to have attempted
to admit Mrs Alice Thomas to hospital before her death. On Form B, Shipman said that
Mrs Thomas died of a right-sided stroke, on 16th April 1987. Shipman said that he had
been with her for 40 minutes before she died but it appears that he had made no attempt
to call an ambulance. He stated that he was present at her death. Dr Grenville advised the
Inquiry that a right-sided stroke, which would be of an occlusive nature, would not usually
result in a sudden death. In my view, if Dr Farrar had applied his mind carefully to the
circumstances of this death, he would have been so concerned that he could not have
signed Form C.
15.85 The death of Mrs Elizabeth Fletcher on 5th January 1988 was rather sudden and also said
to have occurred in Shipman’s presence. Shipman said that the death was due to a stroke,
that he had been with Mrs Fletcher for an hour before her death and that she had died after
being in a coma for 20–30 minutes. He did not refer to any attempt to admit her to hospital.
He said that Mrs Fletcher’s sister-in-law was also present at the death. I accept that
Shipman might have been able to give a plausible account of this death and, looking at
the death in isolation, I can understand why Dr Farrar signed Form C. However, this was
yet a further death occurring in Shipman’s presence in which he failed to call an
ambulance. If Dr Farrar had given thought to the circumstances of these recent deaths, I
think he would have noticed a pattern. I note also that, if Dr Farrar had tried to locate the
‘sister-in-law’, he would have found that there was no such person. If he had located
Mrs Elizabeth Mellor (who is now deceased, having been killed by Shipman), a neighbour,
who had called on Mrs Fletcher to find Shipman in the house with Mrs Fletcher’s dead
body sitting in a chair, he would have felt very concerned indeed about Shipman’s
certification of this death.
373
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
15.86 The seventh death at which Shipman admitted he was present was that of Mrs Mary
Hamer. She died in Shipman’s surgery. Although, at that time, Shipman was a principal at
the Donneybrook Practice, no one else was present at the death. Dr Farrar agreed that a
death in the surgery is most unusual. When it had happened in his practice, the death had
been reported to the coroner. Yet he did not demur when Shipman certified this one. It is
possible that Shipman told Dr Farrar that the coroner had given permission for him to
certify the death and, if he did so, I could understand how Dr Farrar might have agreed to
sign Form C and, in the circumstances, I would not criticise him. It appears that at least
one other patient died in the Donneybrook Surgery and the death was not referred to the
coroner. If, however, Dr Farrar had spoken to a member of Mrs Hamer’s family, he would
have learned that she had been well and that her death was most unexpected. The
surgery receptionist would have told him that Mrs Hamer looked well as she walked into
the surgery.
15.87 I am critical of Dr Farrar’s failure to notice the unusual features of the deaths of Mrs Roberts
and Mrs Winterbottom and consider that he should have refused to sign Form C in respect
of Mrs Higson’s death. These three deaths occurred quite close together in time. I am also
critical in respect of the deaths of Miss White, Mrs Thomas and Mrs Fletcher in that he did
not notice that Shipman was present at the deaths of his patients and yet took no steps to
call an ambulance or organise admission to hospital.
Dr Alastair MacGillivray
15.88 Dr Alastair MacGillivray was registered as a medical practitioner in 1973. In 1975 he joined
one of the Clarendon House practices. In 1993, he moved with his partners to the Brooke
Practice, where he remains.
15.89 Between 1980 and 1998, Dr MacGillivray completed 44 Forms C for patients of Shipman.
Twenty five of the patients in question were unlawfully killed by Shipman. The number of
Forms C Dr MacGillivray completed in each year rose markedly, beginning in 1995.
Whereas the most he had completed in any year until then was three (in 1985, 1993 and
1994), in 1995, the number rose to six, then to seven in 1996 and nine in 1997. Given that
Dr MacGillivray knew that Shipman’s Forms C were spread between the five Brooke
Practice doctors, I think that he could reasonably have been expected to realise, during
this three-year period, that Shipman had an unusually large number of patient deaths
followed by cremation. I think it likely that he was vaguely aware of the increase in Forms
C but did not appreciate its significance. Dr MacGillivray shared the view of his partners
that Shipman had a lot of elderly patients whom he preferred to keep at home rather than
admitting them to hospital and that he was a ‘hands on’ doctor who, if called out, would
take over the function of the ambulance service. Logically considered, these factors could
not provide an explanation for the apparent increase in patient deaths. They might,
however, on a superficial analysis, be thought capable of explaining the high numbers of
deaths. Also, the role of the Form C doctor was to consider individual Forms B rather than
to look out for any pattern. As I have already mentioned, Dr MacGillivray and his Brooke
Practice colleagues were not signing Forms C for any other Form B doctor and so the
opportunity for comparison was limited. For those reasons, I do not think that
374
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Dr MacGillivray should be criticised for his failure to appreciate the significance of the
increase in numbers.
15.90 Although Shipman admitted on Form B that he had been present at the deaths of four
patients for whom Dr MacGillivray signed Form C, he never claimed to have been alone
with the patient at the time of death. These cases were not clustered together in time and
I do not think that Dr MacGillivray could have been expected to notice this feature or to
regard those deaths as unusual, simply by reason of Shipman’s presence at the death.
15.91 A more significant feature of the deaths considered by Dr MacGillivray was that, in no
fewer than 23 cases, Shipman recorded that the patient was alone at the moment of death.
In 14 of those cases, Shipman admitted a visit on the day of death. This reflected a pattern
quite different from Dr MacGillivray’s own professional experience, judging from his
Forms B. Most of his patients died with family or carers present. All but four of the 63
patients for whom he signed a Form B between 1986 and 1998 died in the presence of a
relative, friend or carer. That is a normal pattern. Usually, when a patient dies alone, the
death is to some extent unexpected, the moment of death will not have been observed and
it is appropriate to refer the death to the coroner.
15.92 There are several groups of Shipman’s cases, covering quite short periods, where the
patient ostensibly died alone, yet for which Dr MacGillivray signed Form C. For example,
between October 1992 and May 1993, he signed three Forms C, relating to the deaths of
Mrs Monica Sparkes, Mrs Hilda Couzens and Mrs Emily Morgan. All three deaths were
attributed to stroke or heart attack. If the deceased were alone at the time of death, it is
hard to see how Shipman could have known the cause of death with sufficient confidence
to certify it. I can understand why Dr MacGillivray might have agreed to sign each of these
individual Forms C in isolation but I think it should have occurred to him that Shipman
made a habit of certifying deaths in circumstances where other doctors would not do so.
15.93 I accept that, in some cases, Shipman might have told Dr MacGillivray that he had spoken
to the coroner, who had authorised him to certify the cause of death. Such a conversation
and authorisation should normally be recorded on Form B, although there was no question
specifically covering this point until about 1995; moreover, the old forms continued in use
well into 1997. While giving evidence during Stage Two of the Inquiry, Dr MacGillivray
claimed to remember that Shipman had once boasted to him that he often ‘discussed’
cases with the coroner and the coroner accepted them, even though they were sudden.
It is strange that Dr MacGillivray recalled this incident so late in the day. He had provided
written statements for the Inquiry and had given evidence during Stage One. His
recollection was, he said, ‘vague’. He had never mentioned this incident before. For that
reason alone, I am doubtful as to its accuracy. I accept that it would have been typical of
Shipman to make such a boast. However, I note that, when the new Forms B came into
use, containing an additional question (number 19) which asked whether the coroner had
been informed of the death, Shipman did not claim that he had done so in any of the cases
handled by Dr MacGillivray. It is possible that Shipman made this boast but I think it more
likely that Dr MacGillivray has persuaded himself that it was made.
15.94 Had Dr MacGillivray been more alert, I think it would also have occurred to him that the
pattern of a visit followed by a sudden unattended death was completely at variance with
375
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
his own experience. I have already said, in connection with Dr Dirckze’s position, that a
recent visit followed by a sudden death would be surprising because one might expect
an ambulance to be called out or other care arrangements to be made. The forms tell only
a part of the tale, of course. I do not know what Shipman said to Dr MacGillivray in the three
cases mentioned above but I do observe that Shipman made an entry in Mrs Sparkes’
medical records, suggesting that he had called an ambulance and it is more than likely
he spun a similar yarn to Dr MacGillivray. I note that Mrs Couzens was said in Form B to
have had a history of ischaemic heart disease and to have had an alarm button fitted to
her dress. The observations of a neighbour were said to have informed Shipman’s view as
to the mode and duration of death, in Mrs Morgan’s case. I can see how these little pieces
of information would be embroidered and embellished as necessary for the Form C
doctor. When allied with the general perception of Shipman’s ethos of visiting his patients
at home and not admitting them to hospital, I can see how the picture painted by Shipman
might have been very convincing.
15.95 Between July and November 1995, however, there were three more deaths at which the
patient died alone. These were respectively said to be due to cardiac arrest, old age and
coronary thrombosis. In each case, Shipman had apparently seen the patient an hour or
two before death. Yet the patient was alone at the moment of death. If Dr MacGillivray had
thought analytically about these deaths and other deaths that were to follow, and had he
examined the Forms B carefully, I think he would have noticed a recurring pattern that
patients whom one would normally expect to be receiving care were dying alone.
However, he did neither. He freely admitted that he did not examine Forms B at all carefully
and that he placed complete trust in the oral account given by Shipman.
15.96 There was a further cluster of three deaths in June and July 1996, where the deceased
supposedly died alone. There was yet another cluster of four such deaths between
January and April 1997. In all four of this last cluster, Shipman said on Form B that he had
seen the patient within, at most, 12 hours before the death. Two of these patients were said
to have died as the result of coronary thrombosis. It is very surprising that a patient should
die alone of a sudden cause such as coronary thrombosis within 45 minutes and two and
half hours after a visit from the doctor, as Shipman claimed had happened. It is also very
hard to see how Shipman could have been thought able to certify the cause of death.
15.97 In the other two cases, Shipman certified the cause of death as bronchopneumonia. On
the Form B relating to Mrs Elsie Dean, Shipman said that she had died of
bronchopneumonia at about 3am on 8th January 1997. He had last seen her about 12
hours earlier. She had died alone, had had no nursing care and had been in a coma for
sixto nine hours before death. If true, these circumstances would be most surprising. They
suggest that Shipman left this patient alone with no nursing care, at a time when she must
have been suffering from a chest infection severe enough to cause her to fall into a coma
and die within hours. I cannot think what Shipman could have said to explain this death.
Even more surprising are the supposed circumstances of the death of Mrs Mary Coutts.
She was said to have died of bronchopneumonia at 2.15pm on 21st April 1997. Shipman
said he had last seen her alive at about 1pm. She had had no nursing care and was alone
at the moment of death. She was found by a neighbour, dead in her chair. If true, that
account would suggest that Shipman had left Mrs Coutts alone, without care, just over an
376
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
hour before her death. Dr MacGillivray did not notice anything unusual about this death.
He should have done and he should have refused to sign Form C. I do not think
Dr MacGillivray should have signed Form C in either of these two cases.
15.98 In my view, Dr MacGillivray did not take sufficient care when completing a Form C. I do
not think he thought carefully about the circumstances as outlined by Shipman. If he
listened to the oral account, he cannot have cross-checked it with the content of Form B.
Dr MacGillivray ought to have refused to sign the forms relating to Mrs Dean and
Mrs Coutts. He ought also to have noticed the unusual features of the deaths of Shipman’s
patients so that, when these matters were discussed between the partners of the Brooke
Practice, he could have contributed his observations. I am critical of him in these respects.
I think he failed in his duties as a Form C doctor. I think that he should, by about the
beginning of 1997 at the latest, have realised that something was amiss and raised his
concerns with his partners.
Dr Rajesh Patel
15.99 Dr Rajesh Patel was registered as a medical practitioner in 1986. He undertook general
practitioner training under Dr Vikram Tanna at one of the Clarendon House practices in
1992. For a short period, he worked as an occasional locum for Shipman, to whom he was,
of course, quite junior. In December 1993, he joined the Brooke Practice.
15.100 Between December 1993 and March 1998, Dr Patel completed 29 Forms C for Shipman.
Shipman had killed 22 of the patients in question. He admitted on the Forms B that he had
been present at a total of nine deaths. He claimed that no one had been present at 12
deaths. Both these features are unusual for deaths occurring in the community where it is
far more common for the death to occur in the presence of family or carers. Examination
of the 11 deaths for which Dr Patel himself signed a Form B between September 1993 and
April 1998 reveals that all the patients had been suffering prolonged illness or were in a
nursing home or died in the presence of a relative or carer.
15.101 I am satisfied that Dr Patel did at some stage notice that Shipman seemed to have a large
number of patient deaths and was often present at the deaths. I am not sure when Dr Patel
began to notice these features but I believe it was very probably prior to 1998. He signed
one Form C in 1993, three in 1994, sixin 1995, nine in 1996, seven in 1997 and three in
the first three months of 1998. However, I do not believe it occurred to him that Shipman
might have been guilty of wrongdoing.
15.102 In January 1994, Dr Patel signed a Form C for Miss Joan Harding, who had died in
Shipman’s surgery. I accept Dr Patel’s evidence that Shipman gave a wholly convincing
account of this death and observe there was nothing inconsistent within the account given
in Form B. The fact that Shipman wrote that Sister Gillian Morgan, the practice nurse at the
Market Street Surgery, had been present at the moment of death would, I am sure, have
been very reassuring for Dr Patel. Had Dr Patel sought corroboration from Sister Morgan,
she would have given him an account that was entirely consistent with a sudden natural
death on the premises. She too was, in that respect, taken in by Shipman.
15.103 However, in July 1994, Dr Patel signed a Form C for Miss Maria Thornton. On Form B,
Shipman said that she had died following a stroke. He had seen her about sixhours before
377
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
death. She was alone at the moment of death. Shipman claimed that Miss Thornton had
been found dead by a neighbour; she had apparently collapsed at the table when eating
her tea. Dr Patel told the Inquiry that he did not know how he could have been satisfied at
the time that Miss Thornton had died from a stroke. However, I note that Shipman wrote
that Miss Thornton had underlying arteriosclerosis and I accept that he may well also have
provided a detailed oral history of hypertension and arteriosclerosis. I do not criticise
Dr Patel for signing the Form C in this case.
15.104 On 9th March 1995, Dr Patel signed Forms C for two patients who had died on 7th March.
On Form B, Shipman said that Mrs Netta Ashcroft had died of a coronary thrombosis; she
had underlying ischaemic heart disease. He had seen her at about midday, two hours
before her death, when she was suffering from a chest infection. She had been alone at the
moment of death and had been found by her niece, dead in a chair. Dr Patel was unable to
suggest how Shipman had explained this death. Eventually, he said that he thought
Shipman had probably told him that Mrs Ashcroft had had some angina that morning but
that he had forgotten to put it on Form B. That is possible, although it seems unlikely,
bearing in mind that Shipman had specifically mentioned that Mrs Ashcroft had a chest
infection that morning. I am concerned that Dr Patel signed this Form C but, with a
convincing history from Shipman, who might have mentioned that the niece was providing
some kind of support, many doctors might have accepted that there was sufficient
material for Shipman to certify the cause of death. There are also grounds for suspecting
that Shipman might have suggested that he had spoken to the coroner about the death,
something that he was to suggest on at least two occasions the following year. In the
circumstances, I do not think that Dr Patel can legitimately be criticised for signing the
Form C in this case.
15.105 On the very same day, Dr Patel also signed a Form C for Mrs Lily Bardsley. On Form B,
Shipman said that Mrs Bardsley had died following a stroke. She had arteriosclerosis.
Shipman had arrived half an hour before the death, which occurred at 2.20pm, and had
been alone with her at the moment of death. He said that Mrs Bardsley had collapsed
about 10–15 minutes before her death. So, the picture portrayed on Form B was that
Shipman had arrived at the house, for an unspecified reason; about 15–20 minutes later,
Mrs Bardsley had collapsed and after a further 10–15 minutes, she had died. Dr Patel
cannot now say what Shipman told him but suggested that he might have said that
Mrs Bardsley did not want to go into hospital. Dr Patel said that Shipman often spoke
about his belief that patients had the right to choose whether or not they were to go into
hospital. It would not have occurred to him to doubt Shipman if he said that a patient had
refused to be admitted. I accept that Shipman probably gave a plausible account of this
death and do not criticise Dr Patel for signing Form C. Dr Patel said that, at this time, it had
not occurred to him that it was unusual for a doctor to be present at a death. It is very
important to observe that Dr Patel’s own patient list at the time comprised mainly young
children and their mothers and that he had very few deaths among his own patients. At this
time, he had signed only two Forms B for patients of his own. He was also still quite junior.
15.106 During the remaining months of 1995, Dr Patel signed four more Forms C for Shipman. I
am satisfied that it was not unreasonable for him to do so in any of the four cases. I note
that, in two of the cases, Shipman stated on Form B that he had spoken to the coroner,
378
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
who was agreeable to him certifying the cause of death. In the other two cases, Shipman
said that he had not visited on the day of death. It may well be that the sixForms C that
Dr Patel signed for Shipman in 1995, at a time when he was himself relatively
inexperienced, set a norm for what Dr Patel expected of Shipman in terms of the latter’s
patient deaths.
15.107 In 1996, Dr Patel signed nine Forms C for Shipman. In respect of Mrs Marjorie Waller,
Dr Patel accepted in oral evidence that he cannot have paid close attention to what
Shipman had written on Form B. I think that must be so. Shipman said that Mrs Waller died
of bronchopneumonia two hours after he had seen her. Her death had been preceded by
a collapse of only a few minutes’ duration. She was found dead on the bed by neighbours
who had been to fetch her a prescription. Dr Patel accepted that this account did not make
sense and I cannot see how the account Shipman gave orally can have been even
remotely consistent with the account on Form B, if it was to be reasonably plausible.
Dr Patel said that he must have heard and accepted Shipman’s story and failed carefully
to consider or compare the contents of Form B. I think that is so and I think that the
circumstances are such that they must result in individual criticism of Dr Patel in respect
of this death.
15.108 Dr Patel then accepted without question the account that Shipman gave him of the death
of Mrs Edith Brady who died in his surgery, in circumstances very similar to those of the
death of Miss Harding two years earlier. Dr Patel said in evidence that he had a
recollection of being asked to complete Form C in Mrs Brady’s case and that he had
regarded it as factually similar to the death of Miss Harding. He had also become aware
by this time of at least one other death in a doctor’s surgery. Given that, in 1995, he had
reasonably believed the death of Miss Harding to have been the result of natural causes,
I do not think he should be criticised for accepting that a similar episode had occurred
again, particularly as Shipman again said that Sister Morgan had been present at the
moment of death. The remaining seven deaths for which Dr Patel signed Form C during
1996 do not give rise to any cause for individual criticism of Dr Patel. I accept that Shipman
in each case gave a plausible account and that there was no reason for Dr Patel to
question it.
15.109 The death of Mrs Fanny Clarke on the afternoon of Saturday, 18th May 1996 warrants
special mention because it seems, not only that Shipman was called out to the death, but
that the deputising service had also been called a short time previously. Mrs Clarke had
complained to the deputising service of chest pains and had been advised that she
should go to hospital immediately and that an ambulance would be arranged. She had
refused an ambulance and so it came about that Shipman was informed. The case is
significant because it goes some way to support the perception that patients of Shipman
were likely to call him out in an emergency and would occasionally refuse hospital
admission.
15.110 Dr Patel said that it might have been around this time that he noticed that Shipman had a
high number of patient deaths and that he was present at many. When, on one occasion,
he mentioned this, half jokingly, Shipman admonished him, saying that younger doctors
were far too quick to send their elderly patients to hospital and that they did so because
379
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
they were not prepared to look after them properly at home. Shipman himself, by
implication, did not practise in that way and was accordingly far more likely to be present
at the death of a patient at home. Although I am unsure when this conversation took place
(it might have been rather later, in 1997 or even 1998), it must have made Dr Patel more
ready to accept as explicable Shipman’s frequent presence at the deaths of his
patients.
15.111 In 1997, Dr Patel signed seven Forms C. Although in five of those cases Shipman had
killed the patient, there was nothing on the Forms B to cause Dr Patel to refuse to sign Form
C, particularly when I take into account Dr Patel’s experience of Shipman by this time. I
accept that Shipman would have given a plausible explanation in each case. Shipman
admitted his presence at only one death and only one patient was said to have died alone.
Dr Patel said that, during 1997, he had no suspicion about Shipman.
15.112 In 1998, Dr Patel signed three Forms C for patients of Shipman. In the first two, there was
no obvious reason on the face of Form B why Dr Patel should refuse to sign Form C. I am
prepared to accept that Shipman would have told a plausible tale. In the last case, that of
Mrs Martha Marley, who died on 24th March, Dr Patel signed Form C on 26th March, even
though he and all his colleagues had by then become concerned about Shipman’s
activities. It was on 24th March that Dr Linda Reynolds telephoned the Coroner and was
visited at the Brooke Practice Surgery by Detective Inspector David Smith. Dr Patel knew
that the police were to investigate Shipman and he signed this last form in the mistaken
belief that the police would be aware of and would enquire into the circumstances of
Mrs Marley’s death. He thought that he was supposed to carry on as usual so that Shipman
would not suspect that he was under investigation. There was nothing on the face of Form
B to which Dr Patel could have taken exception; the form did not suggest that Shipman
was present at or had discovered the death and I have no doubt that Shipman gave a
plausible account of the death. I am not critical of Dr Patel for signing this form, although
it is unfortunate that he did so.
15.113 I observe, in conclusion, that there are several cases in which, if Dr Patel had made an
enquiry of a person independent of Shipman, he would have discovered facts at variance
with Shipman’s account and would no doubt have refused to sign Form C. In not adopting
the practice of contacting such persons, Dr Patel was acting in the same way as the vast
majority of doctors. It would be wrong to criticise him or any of his colleagues for that
failure, although I find it regrettable that such a general failing exists. I criticise Dr Patel
only in connection with the cremation Form C relating to Mrs Marjorie Waller.
Dr Stephen Proctor
15.114 Dr Stephen Proctor was registered as a medical practitioner in 1980. He was appointed
as a principal at one of the Clarendon House practices in 1983, when he joined
Dr Beenstock, Dr Farrar and Dr Tanna. He believes that, while a house officer, he may
have had some cursory instruction in the completion of cremation forms. He described the
procedure he adopted when examining a body before completing a Form C. I accept that
he performed a thorough and careful examination.
380
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
15.115 Between 1985 and 1993, Dr Proctor completed 17 Forms C for Shipman. It is now known
that, in sixof those cases, Shipman had killed the patient. Five of the 17 deaths occurred
in 1985, but three of those were natural. Otherwise the deaths and unlawful killings were
spread fairly evenly over the years. Shipman admitted his presence at three deaths; two
of these were close in time. Miss Frances Turner and Miss Vera Bramwell died in August
and December 1985, respectively. I do not think that Shipman’s presence, in itself, should
have made Dr Proctor suspicious; Shipman suggested that a warden was also present at
the death of Miss Bramwell. From 1986 until May 1993, when Dr Proctor signed his last
Form C for Shipman, Shipman did not suggest in relation to any patient for whom
Dr Proctor completed Form C that he had been present at the death. In summary, I would
not expect Dr Proctor to have been concerned about the deaths of Shipman’s patients
solely on account of Shipman’s presence at those three deaths.
15.116 There were five deaths at which Shipman stated that no one was present. These were not
close to each other in time. In two of the cases, those of Mrs Beatrice Toft and Mrs Alice
Jones, Shipman had seen the deceased within a short time before death. However, these
two deaths were over a year apart. I would not have expected Dr Proctor to notice from his
involvement in these five cases that Shipman often seemed prepared to certify the cause
of death in circumstances where many doctors would think it appropriate to refer the death
to the coroner.
15.117 There are, however, two deaths about which Dr Proctor might have been concerned if he
had thought more carefully about their individual circumstances. I do not, however, think
that, in either case, Dr Proctor’s performance was such as to attract individual criticism. I
mention the cases for illustrative purposes.
15.118 Miss Frances Turner died on 23rd August 1985, at the age of 85. On Form B, Shipman
stated that the cause of death was old age and that there was underlying arteriosclerosis.
He said that he had seen Miss Turner two days before her death. She was not in receipt
of nursing care. Shipman alone was present with the deceased at the moment of death.
Dr Proctor said that Shipman would have given him a detailed, sensible and plausible
account of the state of health of a patient whom he knew well, leading up to a death that
it would be reasonable to ascribe to ‘old age’. I accept that that is so. However, it is hard
to imagine how Shipman might have explained his arrival just in time to witness the death,
even though Shipman might have said that he was calling on the patient almost every day.
Yet Dr Proctor did not apparently notice this. I think Dr Proctor was focussing only on the
reasonableness of the cause of death. Given that Dr Proctor had no reason to doubt the
truth of what he was being told by Shipman, I do not think I should criticise him solely on
the basis that what was being described was a very unusual circumstance.
15.119 Mrs Alice Jones died in January 1988. On Form B, Shipman stated that she had died
following a stroke. He did not say that she had any underlying condition. That does not
mean that he did not include such a claim in his oral account to Dr Proctor. He might well
have told him that Mrs Jones had arteriosclerosis, which would have been wholly credible
at her age. On Form B, Shipman said that he had seen Mrs Jones one and a half hours
before her death. No one had been present at the death. In evidence, Dr Proctor agreed
that the cause of death could not have been sufficiently clear to allow Shipman to certify.
381
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
He agreed that if the death was due to a stroke, it must, by its suddenness, have been a
brain stem stroke and these are rare. He said that, if Mrs Jones had been a patient of his,
he would have wished to discuss the death with the coroner before certifying. It is my view
that this death ought to have been reported to the coroner as a sudden death of which the
cause was not known. However, I again refrain from criticising Dr Proctor for signing Form
C in this case, as it is quite possible that Shipman told him that he had discussed the case
with the coroner and had been given permission to issue the MCCD. I accept that, at times,
he claimed to have discussed a case with the coroner and it is not clear whether he always
noted the fact on Form B.
15.120 Dr Proctor agreed that there were many deaths among those he had considered where,
if he had questioned a relative or carer or someone with knowledge of the death, he would
have discovered facts which would have given rise to great concern and which would
have caused him to refuse to sign Form C. In not adopting the practice of questioning such
persons, Dr Proctor was acting in the same way as the overwhelming majority of doctors.
It would be wrong to criticise him for that failure, although, as I have already said, I find it
regrettable that such a general failing exists. I do not therefore find any grounds upon
which to single out Dr Proctor for individual criticism.
Dr Vikram Tanna
15.121 Dr Vikram Tanna was registered as a medical practitioner in 1979 and was appointed a
principal at one of the Clarendon House practices in 1982. He joined Dr Beenstock,
Dr Farrar and Dr David Livingstone.
15.122 Dr Tanna claimed in oral evidence that he was aware that the Form C procedure was
intended to provide a check on any possible wrongdoing by the doctor. I do not accept
that he was. That would be inconsistent with his other evidence which was that he
regarded the process as confirmatory, rather than investigatory, and that it had never
occurred to him not to trust the Form B doctor. It would also be inconsistent with the
approach that he manifestly adopted towards his duties as a Form C doctor.
15.123 Between 1987 and 1993, Dr Tanna completed nine Forms C for Shipman. Of those, it is
now known that eight were unlawful killings. There were no clusters of deaths until early
1993, when Dr Tanna completed three Forms C within two months, two of which were
completed on the same day, in respect of deaths on consecutive days. Shipman admitted
having been present at four of the nine deaths, but in only one case did he say that he was
alone with the patient at the moment of death. Three of those four deaths occurred
between October 1988 and August 1989.
15.124 Mrs Alice Prestwich died on 20th October 1988. Shipman suggested on Form B that she
had a history of ischaemic heart disease and died of a coronary thrombosis. He was with
her during the last hour of her life and was present at the moment of death. The mode of
death was collapse lasting minutes only. No one had nursed her and no one other than
Shipman had been present at her death. Dr Tanna said that he had probably understood
from Shipman that he had been called out urgently by the patient, who was suffering a
coronary thrombosis and whom he unsuccessfully attempted to resuscitate. It did not
appear that Shipman had made any attempt to admit the patient to hospital.
382
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
15.125 Mr Harry Stafford died on 17th December 1988. The circumstances were very similar to
those of Mrs Prestwich’s death. In the case of Mr Stafford, however, the cause of death
was said to be left ventricular failure and a neighbour was said by Shipman to have been
present at the moment of death, in addition to himself. Dr Tanna explained that the
suggested presence of a neighbour would have provided strong support for the belief that
this was an emergency. Again there is no reference to any attempt to admit the patient to
hospital.
15.126 In relation to both cases, Dr Tanna said that Shipman would have given far more detail in
his oral account than he provided on Form B. He might well have claimed, with some
authority, that he had administered diuretic treatment for Mr Stafford’s condition. Dr Tanna
also explained that, in the late 1980s, elderly coronary patients were admitted, not to the
Coronary Care Unit, but to the medical ward, and some did not want to be admitted to that
ward if it was possible for them to be managed at home. That might explain Shipman’s
apparent failure to admit either patient.
15.127 The third death to occur during that ten-month period and for which Dr Tanna signed Form
C was that of Mrs Marion Carradice. The factual circumstances were again similar, with
the suggestion that only Shipman and a neighbour had been present at the death. In
Mrs Carradice’s case, however, the cause of death was said to be left-sided stroke, with
hypertension as the underlying cause. Dr Tanna said that he would not have been struck
by any inconsistency in the picture portrayed by the Form B, namely that a unilateral
thrombotic stroke, which (according to the expert evidence given to the Inquiry by Dr John
Grenville) normally leads only slowly to death, had led to Shipman being called out and
had been followed by a fatal occlusive brain stem stroke, occurring after his arrival.
Dr Tanna said that it was debatable whether the picture was inconsistent.
15.128 My view of these three deaths is that Dr Tanna should not be criticised for signing the
relevant Forms C. The suggested presence of a neighbour, combined with what was then
perceived by Dr Tanna to be Shipman’s reasonable approach towards admitting his
patients, are factors which carry significant weight.
15.129 There were four deaths in which Shipman recorded that no one was present at the moment
of death. This is very unusual in a death that is to be certified by the general practitioner.
These cases were well spread out in time save for two, which were only two months apart.
I do not think this feature occurred with such frequency that Dr Tanna should be criticised
for failing to notice that Shipman seemed to certify deaths that other doctors would have
reported to the coroner.
15.130 I must deal with the last three deaths for which Dr Tanna signed Form C, which occurred
in February and April 1993. The first in time was that of Mrs Olive Heginbotham who was
killed by Shipman on 24th February, although he stated on Form B that she had died, by
his estimate, between 1am and 2am on the following day. Whilst I think this would
ordinarily have been regarded as a death that had to be reported to the coroner, Dr Tanna
said that Shipman might well have explained that, since she was a patient whom he had
been treating for 16 years and who had been suffering congestive heart failure for four
weeks, it was reasonable for him to surmise that the cause of death was congestive
heart failure.
383
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
15.131 Dr Tanna signed Forms C relating to the deaths of Mrs Fanny Nichols and Mrs Marjorie
Parker on the same day, 28th April 1993. According to Form B, Mrs Nichols collapsed and
died alone in her home two hours after a visit by Shipman. She was discovered by her
daughter and Shipman was at the house within 30 minutes of the death. The cause of
death was said to be congestive heart failure due to underlying ischaemic heart disease.
A similar explanation of the death might well have been given by Shipman to that which
he gave in the case of Mrs Heginbotham. Mrs Parker died on 27th April 1993. According
to Form B, she died in the presence of Shipman, her husband and her son. Again, the
presence of family members would have been very reassuring.
15.132 In summary, there are no deaths for which, in my view, Dr Tanna should be criticised for
signing a Form C. There are several that, on the face of Form B, are unusual. However, in
each case, I consider that it is likely that Shipman was able to tell a plausible tale which
was not frankly inconsistent with what he had put on Form B.
15.133 In many of the cases considered by Dr Tanna, questioning of relatives or carers would
have revealed a story completely inconsistent with the oral account that Shipman must
have given. As Dr Tanna told me, he would have been extremely concerned to hear a
relation or carer give a different account from that given by Shipman. It is most unfortunate
that the practice in most areas was not to question the relatives. Dr Tanna should not, in
this respect, be singled out for criticism and nor, as I have said, should he be individually
criticised in any other way for his performance as a Form C doctor.
The Forms C Signed by Dr Linda Reynolds
15.134 I shall conclude by considering those deaths for which the late Dr Linda Reynolds
completed Forms C. Her position is unusual for two reasons. First, she was unable to give
evidence to the Inquiry. I have only a very general account of how she reacted to the
experience of considering Shipman’s Forms C. Second, she was the driving force behind
the decision of the Brooke Practice doctors to raise their concerns about Shipman. She
might not have been the first to notice anything strange but she was the first to feel strongly
that something must be done. She was plainly conscientious. It would be unthinkable to
criticise her for not having noticed the features that caused her to be concerned or for not
having made her report sooner than she did.
15.135 Dr Reynolds was registered as a medical practitioner in 1975. Before joining the Brooke
Practice, she had been a principal in a general practice in Reddish, Stockport, for 19 years.
15.136 I have no reason to believe that Dr Reynolds adopted a different general approach to the
completion of Form C from that of her colleagues. I note, for example, that she did not
make enquiries of any person independent of the Form B doctor and always answered
questions 5–8 in the negative. I am satisfied that Dr Reynolds would have undertaken her
Form C duties carefully and intelligently. Yet she never refused to sign one of Shipman’s
Forms C; nor, until soon after the death of Mrs Lily Higgins in March 1998, did she contact
anyone in authority.
15.137 Between September 1996 and March 1998, Dr Reynolds completed 11 Forms C for
Shipman. As it happens, Shipman had killed every one of those patients. Two of the
patients died in late 1996, sixin 1997 and three in early 1998.
384
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
15.138 I have already said that, at an early stage, Dr Reynolds noticed that she was completing
Forms C more frequently than she had ever done at her practice in Reddish. That was her
first concern. The Forms B also showed that Shipman said that he was present at no fewer
than sixout of the 11 deaths, although he said he was present alone at only one. It is known
that Dr Reynolds noticed this feature and thought it odd. When she raised it with her
partners around the end of 1997, they advised her that Shipman had a lot of elderly
patients and was well known as a doctor who would visit his patients unannounced when
he was concerned about their condition. She was somewhat reassured.
15.139 In four cases, Shipman had said on Form B that no one was present at the death. It is not
known what Dr Reynolds thought about that. It would probably have been unusual for her
to complete and sign a Form B in a case where no one had been present at the death, at
least without discussing the circumstances with the coroner. It would be unusual because
there would be no one available to describe to her the circumstances of the death and
because, if the death had been expected, family or carers would be likely to have been
present.
15.140 In short, the picture presented by the deaths of Shipman’s patients was wholly abnormal.
It must have been very different from her experience in Reddish. Yet, her concern about
these features was not such that she felt compelled to take positive steps until she learned
that Mrs Bambroffe was also concerned about the deaths of Shipman’s patients.
15.141 I do not propose to lengthen this Chapter by detailed consideration of every death
considered by Dr Reynolds. It suffices to say two things. First, there is no Form B among
those that she considered that contained manifest inaccuracy, internal inconsistency or
medical implausibility. Second, I can well believe that, in each case, Shipman would have
been able to tell a convincing tale of what had occurred so that Dr Reynolds would have
had no reason to doubt the truthfulness of what he said. Individually, the deaths
considered by Dr Reynolds did not give rise to any cause for concern, sufficient to warrant
a refusal to sign Form C. Viewed collectively, however, they revealed the disturbing
pattern which Dr Reynolds noticed and which spurred her to act. I repeat, it would be
unthinkable to suggest that Dr Reynolds ought to have felt concern at an earlier date than
that at which she did.
Conclusions
15.142 In a few instances, I have been critical of individual doctors in connection with the
performance of their duties as a Form C doctor. Their poor performance is mitigated,
although not entirely excused, by the generally low standard of Form C completion
prevailing throughout the profession. The low prevalent standards had been condoned by
the profession generally and by the Home Office, the Government Department
supervising the operation of the scheme, at least since they had been highlighted in the
Brodrick Report, published in 1971.
15.143 In the great majority of individual cases, I accept that Shipman was able to tell a plausible
tale, which was not frankly inconsistent with the account given on Form B. Even if, in the
cases in which I have criticised a doctor for signing a particular Form C, the doctor had
385
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
queried the propriety of Shipman’s decision to certify the cause of death, I do not think it
would have led to his detection. I think it likely that Shipman would have claimed that, in the
light of the objection raised, he had spoken to the coroner, who had approved the cause of
death. Distrust of Shipman would not have been such as to cause the Form C doctor to
verify the truth of that statement. However, if this had happened regularly, it would or
should have attracted notice.
15.144 It is clear that the Form C procedure, as operated in this country for many decades, has
been wholly inadequate as a safeguard against concealed wrongdoing by a Form B
doctor. By wrongdoing, I mean, not only homicide, but also negligence and neglect. It is
clear that any system which depends on the integrity of one doctor is open to abuse by
that doctor, if s/he is dishonest.
15.145 I have said that some of the Brooke Practice doctors might have noticed, not only the
number of deaths among Shipman’s patients and the increase in numbers which occurred
in 1995, but also some features of deaths which were unusual and out of line with their
experience of deaths among their own patients. It is apparent that, eventually, some of
them did notice the number or frequency of the deaths and also noticed that Shipman was
often present. Eventually, they came to realise that these factors indicated that all was not
as it should be but they did not reach that state of mind until Mrs Bambroffe had voiced
her concerns. Ought they to have suspected Shipman sooner?
15.146 The problem was that, although Dr Booth, Dr MacGillivray, Dr Patel and Dr Dirckze all had
reason to notice some unusual feature or features, the features were not the same for all
of them. Dr Booth had a lot of cases at which Shipman was present at the death. For
Dr Dirckze and Dr MacGillivray, the unusual feature was that the patient so often died
alone, in many cases soon after Shipman had visited. Dr Patel had a significant number
of cases at which Shipman was present and at which no one else was apparently present.
When Dr Reynolds arrived, she too had a mixture of deaths at which Shipman was present
and at which no one else was present. Given the different experiences of the five doctors,
and given the prevailing attitude of complete trust in fellow professionals, it does not
surprise me that the Brooke Practice doctors convinced themselves that the high number
and apparently unusual features of Shipman’s patient deaths were attributable to the
prevalence of elderly patients on his list and the way in which he conducted his practice.
Although, with the benefit of hindsight, it can clearly be seen that all these unusual features
were in fact present because he was killing his patients, I do not think it would be fair to
suggest that the Brooke Practice doctors should have appreciated the significance of the
different factors before they did.
15.147 All the Hyde doctors now accept that, if they had questioned a relative or person with
knowledge of the death, they would in many cases have discovered facts which would
have caused them to refuse to sign Form C. As I have said in Chapter Eleven, I believe
that, if it had been a requirement that the Form C doctors should complete at least one of
questions 5–8 of Form C in the affirmative, Shipman would either have been deterred from
killing so many patients or have been detected sooner than he was. The effect would have
been the saving of a significant number of lives.
386
SHIP03$$27 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
15.148 It is a matter of regret that the Hyde doctors, who have, I accept, found it distressing to
realise that they have played a part, albeit an innocent part, in the Shipman story, have still
not changed their practice in relation to completion of Forms C. Not one of those doctors
told the Inquiry that s/he now speaks to a relative or carer before signing Form C. Their
attitude seems to be that they will do so only if they are told that they must do so.
387
SHIP03P015 25-06-03 13:11:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 2
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The Dukinfield Crematorium Medical Referees
Introduction
16.1 In this Chapter, I shall examine the work of the two doctors who were employed as medical
referees at the Dukinfield crematorium during the years in which Shipman killed so many
of his patients. Dr Betty Hinchliffe was appointed as the Deputy Medical Referee in the late
1970s and became Medical Referee on the death of her predecessor, Dr Thomas Holme,
in 1989. Soon after Dr Hinchliffe’s appointment, Dr Jane Holme, the daughter of
Dr Thomas Holme, was appointed as her deputy. Dr Hinchliffe continued as Medical
Referee until 1999, when she retired. Dr Jane Holme retired at the same time.
16.2 Dr Hinchliffe authorised the cremation of the bodies of 176 of Shipman’s patients. Of those
patients, Shipman had killed 107. Dr Holme authorised the cremation of the bodies of 31
of Shipman’s patients, of whom 23 had been killed. I shall consider whether the frequency
with which these medical referees considered cremation forms completed by Shipman,
or the unusual content of those forms, should have caused the medical referees to be in
any way concerned about Shipman’s practice. I shall also consider whether the contents
of any particular forms were so strange or unsatisfactory that the medical referee who saw
them should have refused to authorise cremation of the body and have ordered an
autopsy or referred the death to the coroner.
Professional Experience
16.3 I have already referred briefly to the careers of the two medical referees in Chapter Eleven.
Dr Hinchliffe graduated in medicine from Manchester University in 1951. She then spent
two years working in hospital, followed by two years as a locum general practitioner.
Thereafter, she was employed in the field of child health, eventually specialising in
paediatric audiology. She had no further experience of general practice or of the care and
treatment of elderly people. Before her appointment as Deputy Medical Referee, she had
very little experience of cremation certification. She had occasionally completed Forms B
during her two years as a house officer. She said she had completed a Form C ‘perhaps
on two occasions’. She was appointed at the suggestion of the previous Medical Referee,
Dr Thomas Holme, with whom she had previously worked in public health.
16.4 Dr Jane Holme, Dr Hinchliffe’s deputy, graduated in medicine, also from Manchester
University, in 1966. She spent her pre-registration year working in hospital and then
moved to local authority work in the field of child health. She never worked in general
practice and had no experience of the care and treatment of elderly people. She had
completed some Forms B when working as a junior doctor in hospital, but had never
completed a Form C. She was appointed Deputy Medical Referee by reason of her family
relationship with Dr Thomas Holme and her professional relationship with Dr Hinchliffe.
16.5 In my view, a medical referee should have some experience of patients who die. This
could most easily be gained by experience in the care and treatment of the elderly, as
most people die in old age. Such experience might be gained in a number of ways, for
389
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
example in general practice. It cannot be gained by experience in the field of child
health.
16.6 I also think it highly desirable that a medical referee should, at least for a time, have had
experience of completing Forms B and C and working with others who also have such
experience. He or she would then be aware of how the system works from the doctors’
point of view, what the problems are with the completion of Form B and the extent of the
investigation usually carried out by the Form C doctor. In my view, neither Dr Hinchliffe nor
Dr Holme was adequately equipped by her professional experience for the work of a
medical referee, who has to assess the information provided on cremation Forms B and C.
The Task to Be Undertaken
16.7 In Chapter Eleven, I set out the duties of the medical referee, as provided by the Cremation
Regulations. I can summarise those duties briefly. The medical referee should seek to
satisfy him/herself that the forms have been duly completed, that the enquiry made by the
persons completing the forms has been adequate, that the fact and cause of death have
been definitely ascertained and that there is no reason why the body should be examined
further. In Chapter Eleven, I pointed out that the requirement that the medical referee
should be satisfied the cause of death has been definitely ascertained is unrealistic and
unachievable.
16.8 In Chapter Eleven, I also explained that there appeared to be two schools of thought about
how the duties of the medical referee were to be carried out, some believing that the task
was of an essentially clerical nature and others believing that they were under a duty to
review, and form an independent judgement upon, the information in the forms. I
concluded that the powers given to the medical referee, and the requirement that s/he be
a medical practitioner of five years’ standing, make it clear that s/he must undertake more
than a clerical check. It is not clear from the Regulations how much more should be done
or how the medical referee is to satisfy him/herself that the cremation should be
authorised. As it appeared that it was the intention of Parliament that the medical referee
should not usually undertake independent enquiries of his/her own, I expressed the view
that the process of review described by Dr Gordon Pledger and Dr Ian Morgan, two
medical referees who gave oral evidence to the Inquiry, seemed a reasonable one. Their
approach entails a review of all the information given in the documents (especially Form
B) and consideration of the ‘whole picture’, in order to assess whether the cause of death is
consistent with that picture. I have already pointed out (see paragraph 11.116) that, even if
completed conscientiously, the documents frequently contain inadequate information to
enable the medical referee to gain a clear picture of the events leading up to death. Form
B does not require the doctor to provide even a brief account of the deceased’s medical
history, nor of the circumstances of the death. Nevertheless, it is evident from the forms
examined by the Inquiry that some impression of the circumstances (e.g. whether the
death followed a terminal illness or occurred suddenly) can usually be gained. If the
information is so sparse that this is not possible, it is open to the medical referee to make
enquiries of the certifying doctor.
16.9 Form B provides most of the information upon which the medical referee will base his/ her
judgement. In respect of Form C, the medical referees at most crematoria (including
390
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Dukinfield) would expect to see only that the second doctor had carefully examined the
body externally, questioned the Form B doctor and confirmed the latter’s opinion as to the
cause of death. It appears that most medical referees would deem that to be an adequate
enquiry, although, as I have explained in Chapters Three and Eleven, there are some
crematoria where an enquiry of a person other than the Form B doctor is required before
authority to cremate will be given. I would expect that the medical referee would
appreciate that the Form C doctor would probably not have examined the medical records
and would have accepted the Form B doctor’s account as honest. In other words, I would
expect the medical referee to appreciate that the decision of the Form C doctor to confirm
the Form B doctor’s opinion as to cause of death would have entailed only a consideration
of whether the opinion was a reasonable one, bearing in mind the history as given by the
Form B doctor. At Dukinfield, as at most crematoria, there was no requirement for the Form
C doctor to make an enquiry of a person independent of the Form B doctor, to check on
the accuracy of the history provided by the Form B doctor.
Dr Hinchliffe’s Perception of Her Task
16.10 Dr Hinchliffe’s evidence was that, as well as a clerical check, she carried out the exercise
of assessing the ‘whole picture’ as described by Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan. She
described herself as ‘trying to fill in a little jigsaw puzzle’. She also sought to make sure
that every question had been answered, that there was consistency between the details
(name, cause of death, date of death, etc.) contained in the various forms and that there
was nothing on the face of the forms which would render the case reportable to the
coroner. She told the Inquiry that she had never had occasion to order an autopsy, refer
a death to the coroner or decline to allow a cremation to take place.
16.11 I regret to say that I am unable to accept Dr Hinchliffe’s evidence that she carried out such
an exercise. I reach that conclusion for several reasons. The first is that it was not until she
came to give oral evidence that Dr Hinchliffe suggested that she had ever carried out a
review of the ‘whole picture’. In her first Inquiry witness statement, she described the
procedure she would follow in some detail. At only one stage did she suggest that the task
was anything other than administrative. She spoke of the need to check that the death was
not due to trauma or a medical procedure, such as would make it reportable to the
coroner. I accept that she did that. However, she did not suggest that she reviewed the
information to see whether the cause of death was reasonable and consistent with the
surrounding circumstances and with the picture as a whole. Twice in her Inquiry witness
statements, Dr Hinchliffe described the task of a medical referee as ‘clerical’ in nature.
She observed that the task did not involve ‘a review of the medical opinions expressed
on the forms’.
16.12 My second reason is that Dr Holme received her informal training from Dr Hinchliffe and
her evidence was that Dr Hinchliffe had not taught her that the task was anything more
than a clerical job.
16.13 Third, if Dr Hinchliffe had carried out the exercise of looking at the ‘whole picture’ or
completing ‘a little jigsaw puzzle’, she would have been bound to observe that, in respect
of a number of cases which she considered, the information contained in Form B was
391
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
either inconsistent with the stated cause of death or was not adequate for the purpose of
forming any view as to the consistency between the cause of death and the surrounding
circumstances. Faced with a Form B which contained either inconsistent or inadequate
information, she would have had to make further enquiries of the Form B doctor before she
was able to decide whether or not to authorise cremation. She made no such enquiries in
those cases.
16.14 Dr Hinchliffe said that she did not make such enquiries because she assumed that, if she
had enquired, a satisfactory explanation would have been provided. She also said that it
was acceptable for her to rely on such an assumption, rather than making further enquiries
herself, because she believed that the Form C doctor would have made any necessary
enquiries and would have satisfied him/herself that there was an acceptable explanation
for any apparent inconsistencies or omissions. If this were indeed her approach, then any
attempt by her to assess the ‘whole picture’ was completely without purpose. Even if that
assessment revealed a glaring omission in the ‘jigsaw’, on her account, she would take
no action, confident in the belief that the Form C doctor would have done so. There is a
fundamental inconsistency between her claim that she was trying to see the ‘whole
picture’ and her claim that it was reasonable for her not to make any enquiry of the doctor
if she noticed inadequate or inconsistent information on Form B.
16.15 Fourth, it was Dr Hinchliffe’s practice to make a note on the form if, for any reason, she had
to speak to the Form B doctor to obtain additional information before she could take a
decision whether or not to authorise cremation. Examination of a large number of forms
reveals that they bear a number of endorsements in her hand, relating to such matters as
the date on which the Form B doctor had last seen the deceased alive or, in a case where,
for example, the doctor had not seen the deceased for more than 14 days before death,
whether the death had been discussed with the coroner. However, no form bears any
annotation relating to enquiries about the cause of death.
16.16 Finally, Dr Hinchliffe said that she dealt with each form individually. Yet she never gained
any impression of the overall proportion of deaths that occurred in hospital and in the
community. Nor had she formed any impression of the proportion of deaths referred to the
coroner. She said she had never thought about these issues. If Dr Hinchliffe had indeed
seen the ‘whole picture’ of every death, I would have expected that she would have gained
at least a general impression of the profile of the deaths dealt with at the crematorium.
16.17 My conclusion that Dr Hinchliffe did not carry out a review of the information contained in
the cremation forms is consistent with her general approach to her task. She had a very
uncritical view of the whole process of cremation certification. She placed her trust in the
Form C doctor as an ‘independent source’ but did not know that the Form B doctors
selected the Form C doctor; it had not occurred to her therefore that the Form C doctor
might not be independent of the Form B doctor. She did not know whether a Form C doctor
ever examined the deceased’s medical records, although she assumed (mistakenly in
most cases) that the Form C doctor would have had access to them. She was unaware
that the physical examination of the body by the Form C doctor was sometimes cursory.
She did not consider the difficulties which might be experienced by a Form C doctor in
disagreeing with a forceful, possibly more senior, colleague. It had never occurred to her
392
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
that a Form C doctor who gained a reputation as being a ‘stickler’ might not be invited to
complete a Form C again in the future.
16.18 It appeared to me that Dr Hinchliffe’s main concern and preoccupation was that the
families of the deceased should not be distressed or inconvenienced by any delay in the
funeral arrangements. Her objective was to ensure that the cremation forms could be
approved in time. Whilst this is, of course, important, the medical referee also has a duty
not to authorise a cremation until properly satisfied as to the cause of death. I am sure that
Dr Hinchliffe thought it appropriate to authorise a cremation in every case where the forms
had been properly completed. Her consideration of the cause of death was, I am
confident, confined to checking that the cause given on Form C tallied with that stated on
Form B.
16.19 I conclude that Dr Hinchliffe has persuaded herself that she used to carry out more than
a clerical check of the forms whereas, in fact, she did not do so. In persuading herself of
this, she might have been influenced by the evidence of Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan. Also,
when she came to examine the forms for cremations she had authorised, and to reflect on
the declaration which she had made on Form F in those cases, she might have come to
realise that the medical referee’s duties must consist of more than a clerical check. She
has persuaded herself that she used to undertake the task of scrutinising the cremation
forms in the way described by Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan. I am sure that she did not.
Dr Hinchliffe believes that she carried out her duties conscientiously. In my view, she did
indeed carry out her duties, as she then saw them, with a proper degree of care. However,
she did not perform them as she should have done, because she did not realise, until
shortly before she came to give evidence, that more than a clerical check was required of
her. It is unfortunate that Dr Hinchliffe so persistently and unrealistically claimed in
evidence that she had done more than she ever had.
16.20 I am reluctant to criticise any medical referee who, until recently, believed the task to be
of an essentially clerical nature, because this mistaken belief was not uncommon and
because there was no training or guidance by which mistakes could be corrected.
However, I would have thought that the application of common sense to the words of the
Regulations (particularly the power to order a post-mortem examination) should have
suggested to Dr Hinchliffe that the task required the exercise of some degree of medical
judgement and was intended to be more than clerical. I can only conclude that, like many
of her colleagues, Dr Hinchliffe never paused to consider the underlying purpose of the
work of the medical referee, nor why, if that purpose were essentially clerical in nature, the
work had to be undertaken by an experienced medical practitioner.
Dr Holme’s Perception of Her Task
16.21 Dr Holme’s evidence was that her task was essentially to carry out a clerical check. She
did not consider that she should review the medical opinions expressed by the Form B
and Form C doctors. The only context in which she looked at the cause of death was to
ensure that the same cause of death was given on both Forms B and C. She also looked
out for indications that the death might be reportable to the coroner, for example because
it had been caused by an accident. Although she sometimes spoke to the Form B doctor,
393
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
to fill in a space on a form which had been left blank or occasionally to clarify a point, she
never on any occasion queried the cause of death. Nor did she ever order an autopsy,
refer a case to the coroner or decline to allow a cremation to take place.
16.22 Dr Holme thought that it was the duty of the Form C doctor to satisfy him/herself that the
cause of death was appropriate and consistent with the medical history and
circumstances. She seemed uncertain as to the way in which this might have been done.
This is not surprising, given her own lack of experience as a Form C doctor.
16.23 Examination of the forms she considered shows that, within the limits she set herself,
Dr Holme carried out the clerical check conscientiously. However, had Dr Holme
undertaken a full assessment of the cremation forms, rather than a clerical check, such an
assessment of many of Shipman’s forms would have revealed inconsistencies and
inaccuracies which would have required enquiries to be made before the cremations
could properly be authorised.
16.24 Like Dr Hinchliffe and many of her colleagues, Dr Holme does not appear to have given
any thought to the underlying purpose of the work done by the medical referee. Had she
done so, she should surely have realised that the role involved the exercise of a degree
of medical judgement, rather than just a clerical check.
Should the Medical Referees Have Noticed Shipman’s Activities?
The Number and Distribution of Deaths
16.25 The number of Shipman-certified deaths dealt with by Dr Hinchliffe must be placed in the
context of the total number (about 2000 per annum) of deaths that she processed.
Moreover, whilst Shipman certified clusters of deaths at various times, it is apparent from
the research carried out by the Inquiry that he was not alone in this.
16.26 The most remarkable cluster of deaths certified by Shipman occurred on 13th March 1995,
when three of the 12 sets of forms examined by Dr Hinchliffe were for patients of Shipman.
Because she was authorising so many cremations, and because other doctors also
certified clusters, I accept that it was not unreasonable for Dr Hinchliffe to attribute to
coincidence the fact that she was called upon to authorise the cremations of three of
Shipman’s deceased patients on the same day. I shall consider later whether Dr Hinchliffe
should have noticed anything unusual about the circumstances of those three deaths.
16.27 I conclude that neither the number nor the distribution of Shipman’s patient deaths
scrutinised by Dr Hinchliffe were so unusual that she should have found them noteworthy.
16.28 Dr Holme saw only 31 of Shipman’s Forms B and these were spread over eight years.
There were no clusters. There was nothing about the numbers to draw Shipman to her
attention.
The Failure to Recognise Inadequately Completed and Internally Inconsistent Forms
16.29 I have said that Dr Hinchliffe authorised cremations following 107 deaths where Shipman
had killed. In some of those cases, even the most careful scrutiny of the forms would have
394
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
failed to reveal any inadequacy or inconsistency or, indeed, anything unusual about their
contents. However, such features would have been apparent in the contents of a
significant number of the forms examined.
16.30 I have already explained that I am sure that, before giving authority to cremate,
Dr Hinchliffe carried out what was essentially a clerical check only on the cremation forms.
In oral evidence, however, she contended that she had reviewed the forms in order to ‘fill
in a little jigsaw puzzle’ and assess whether the picture as a whole was consistent with the
cause of death. At the Inquiry hearings, she was referred by Leading Counsel to the
Inquiry to the forms relating to a number of cases in which she had authorised cremations.
Dr Hinchliffe was asked, in respect of each case, to explain the picture which had
emerged from her review of the forms and the basis upon which she had felt able to
authorise the cremation without further enquiry.
16.31 Dr Hinchliffe was asked in some detail about a number of such cases. However, I do not
propose to lengthen this Report by a detailed exposition of the facts of each case in which
Form B was unsatisfactory, the problems raised and Dr Hinchliffe’s explanation for her
decision to allow cremation. There were many such cases, including those of Mrs Marjorie
Parker, Mr John Molesdale, Mr Joseph Shaw, Mrs Netta Ashcroft, Mrs Lily Bardsley and
Miss Brenda Ashworth. In all these cases, Dr Hinchliffe authorised cremation without
making any enquiry of Shipman. In the case of Mrs Erla Copeland, whose death Shipman
had attributed to ‘natural causes’ (an unacceptable cause of death), Dr Hinchliffe claimed
that she had spoken to Shipman before authorising cremation. However, I do not think she
can have done, as there is no note on Form B of any conversation or additional information.
I shall refer in detail to only two cases about which Dr Hinchliffe was asked in evidence,
those of Miss Ethel Bennett and Mrs Eileen Robinson, by way of illustration.
Miss Ethel Bennett
16.32 According to the first page of the Form B completed by Shipman, Miss Bennett died at her
home at about 4pm on 19th December 1988. The cause of death was said to be
bronchopneumonia. Shipman said that he had been her doctor for 12 years. He said he
had attended her for six hours during her last illness and had last seen her alive about six
hours before her death. Dr Hinchliffe agreed that that implied he had visited her on one
occasion during her pneumonia and that that visit had taken place six hours before death,
i.e. at about 10am. Shipman also stated that he had seen the body about one and a half
hours after death, which would have been at about 5.30pm.
16.33 On the second page of Form B, Shipman said that Miss Bennett had been in a coma for
‘hour only’ before death. He wrote: ‘Seen by self at 1300 hrs, found by son at 1830.
Neighbour heard her at 1500 hrs moving about, then found sat in chair’. He also
stated that Miss Bennett had not been receiving nursing care and that no one had been
present at the moment of her death.
16.34 It is immediately apparent that the timing of events given on the first page is inconsistent
with that on the second. Dr Hinchliffe said that, when she reviewed the form, she had
not noticed this inconsistency. There were also two inconsistencies between Form B
and the information in Form A. Form A had been completed by Mr Alan Roy Bennett,
395
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Miss Bennett’s nephew, who stated that he was her nearest surviving relative. If that were
right, Miss Bennett did not have a son who could have found her dead at 6.30pm. Second,
on Form A, the time of death was said to be 6pm, whereas in Form B it was said to be 4pm.
Dr Hinchliffe said that she had not noticed either of those inconsistencies.
16.35 Perhaps more serious was Dr Hinchliffe’s failure to notice the inherent implausibility of
Shipman’s account of this death. The picture that Dr Hinchliffe should have pieced
together was of an elderly woman whom Shipman visited at about 10am, but apparently
left alone without any nursing care. From that, one would infer that she was not seriously
ill at that stage. Shipman might or might not have seen Miss Bennett again at 1pm; the
information is contradictory. Miss Bennett was apparently still ‘moving about’ at 3pm,
when she was heard by a neighbour. Yet, at about that time, she appears to have been
lapsing into a coma that lasted for an hour before her death at about 4pm. Given that
bronchopneumonia is not an extremely acute condition and that death is usually
preceded by at least several hours of grave illness, this picture simply does not make
sense. Yet, Dr Hinchliffe failed to realise this and could give no explanation for her failure. I
can only conclude that, when reviewing the forms, she did not attempt to look at the ‘whole
picture’ of this death, as she claimed. Nor, I am bound to observe, does she appear to
have performed a particularly careful clerical check.
Mrs Eileen Robinson
16.36 Mrs Robinson died in December 1993, at the age of only 54. According to the Form B
completed by Shipman, she died at home at about midnight on 22nd December. Shipman
said he had been her doctor for 17 years and had attended her for four months during her
last illness. He said that he had last seen her alive about 12 hours before her death, which
would have been at about noon on the 22nd December. He stated that the cause of death
was coronary thrombosis due to hypertension and that the death had been preceded by
a collapse lasting ‘seconds only’. That information was said to be the result of his own
observations. He said that nobody had nursed Mrs Robinson in her last illness and no one
had been present at the death. He explained the circumstances in which Mrs Robinson
had been found as follows: ‘Broke in with police found on floor dead’.
16.37 When asked what she thought must have been the ‘last illness’ for which Shipman had
been attending Mrs Robinson for four months, Dr Hinchliffe replied that it must have been
for some cardiac reason and then added that it might have been for hypertension.
However, she seemed to agree that hypertension is a risk factor for coronary thrombosis,
but could not properly be described as a ‘last illness’. Dr Hinchliffe then suggested that
the last illness might have been angina. However, this was pure speculation.
16.38 Dr Hinchliffe was then asked how, if Shipman had been treating Mrs Robinson for
hypertension and she had been found dead on the floor, having apparently died alone, it
would have been possible for him rationally to conclude that her death was due to
coronary thrombosis, as opposed to some other cause such as a cerebrovascular
accident. Dr Hinchliffe was driven to suggest that Mrs Robinson might have had a
previous coronary thrombosis and that the Form C doctor would have discussed all these
problems with Shipman and resolved them.
396
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
16.39 This case clearly demonstrates that Dr Hinchliffe did not look at the ‘whole picture’ when
reviewing the cremation forms and thus did not notice the inadequacy of the information
upon which Shipman had apparently based his diagnosis of the cause of death. In
seeking to provide explanations for what Shipman had written, she was driven, when
giving evidence, into speculation and unwarranted assumption.
16.40 I shall also consider two sets of cremation forms completed by Shipman, which related to
cases in which Dr Holme had authorised cremations. These are the cases of Mrs Elsie
Godfrey and Mrs Mary Coutts.
Mrs Elsie Godfrey
16.41 Mrs Godfrey was found dead at her home on 8th May 1996, at the age of 85. According to
the Form B completed by Shipman, she died at home at 6.30pm on 7th May. Shipman said
that he had been her doctor for 19 years and had attended her for over six weeks during
her last illness. He said that he had last seen her alive on 3rd May and had seen her body
about 18 hours after death, which would have been at about 12.30pm on 8th May. Shipman
stated that the cause of death was old age, with hypertension and diabetes mellitus being
other conditions contributing to the death but not related to the immediate cause. Shipman
said that the mode of death was ‘syncope’ lasting ‘seconds only’. He said that
Mrs Godfrey had been ‘Found by warden dead in chair by body tempdied 1830 7.5.96.’
He said that no one had nursed Mrs Godfrey in her last illness and no one had been
present at the death.
16.42 According to the form, Mrs Godfrey had died of old age. That would imply a gradual
decline and deterioration, leading to death. Yet, she had received no nursing care
(although she was in warden-controlled accommodation) and had died alone. Moreover,
Shipman claimed to have attended her for only six weeks during her ‘last illness’. He had
last seen her four days before her death, yet was able to say she had died of a ‘syncope’
lasting ‘seconds only’. He was also apparently able, 18 hours after her death, to estimate
the time of the death with accuracy.
16.43 When asked about the death, Dr Holme said that she would not have formed a picture of
the circumstances of the death and would not have considered whether the diagnosis was
correct. Nor did she think she would have noticed the attempt to estimate the time of death.
Had she done so, she might have ascribed it to a ‘rather old-fashioned doctor’.
Mrs Mary Coutts
16.44 Mrs Coutts died in April 1997, at the age of 80. According to the Form B completed by
Shipman, she died at home at 2.15pm on 21st April. Shipman said that he had been her
doctor for 15 years and had attended her for two hours during her last illness. He said that
he had last seen her alive at about 1pm on the day of her death. He said that he had seen
the body about an hour after death, which would have been at about 3.15pm. He stated
that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia, with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
being a condition contributing to death but not related to the immediate cause.
16.45 Shipman went on to say that the mode of death had been ‘syncope’ lasting ‘minutes
only’. He recorded that the observations about the mode of death were his own and those
397
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
of neighbours. He also recorded that Mrs Coutts had been ‘found by neighbour dead in
chair’. No one had nursed her during her last illness and no one had been present at
her death.
16.46 According to the form, Shipman left Mrs Coutts about one and a quarter hours before her
death from bronchopneumonia. She was not being nursed and she died alone. Given the
short time which was to elapse before her death, and the nature of the condition from
which she died, Mrs Coutts must have been very ill indeed when Shipman left her. Upon
reading the form, one is left wondering how a doctor came to leave her in that state and
what arrangements he had made for the support and care she must obviously have
needed.
16.47 Again, Dr Holme said that she would not have marshalled the facts so as to provide the
sort of picture which I have set out above. Therefore, it would not have occurred to her that
there was anything abnormal about the contents of the form.
Examination by Other Medical Referees
16.48 The Inquiry invited two experienced medical referees, Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan, to
examine a number of cremation forms relating to Shipman’s patients. They were
requested to do so as if they were viewing the forms in the course of their normal duties at
their crematoria. They were asked, as far as possible, to put from their minds the
knowledge that Shipman is a known murderer. I bear in mind that that is a difficult condition
with which to comply. Nonetheless, I am satisfied that both made a genuine effort to
examine the forms objectively. Both medical referees found many forms that contained
inadequate information upon which to form a judgement about the basis on which the
cause of death had been diagnosed. In some, there were internal inconsistencies. Of the
33 sets of Dr Hinchliffe’s forms examined by Dr Pledger, he would have accepted six
without further enquiry. He would have wished to speak to Shipman in the other 27 cases.
He recognised that, if Shipman had given a satisfactory and plausible account of the
medical background, he might well have authorised cremation. However, he thought that,
in four of those 27 cases, his level of concern would have led him to consider ordering an
autopsy. Of the 60 sets of forms examined by Dr Morgan, he would have wished to speak
to Shipman for clarification of some point in 17 cases. He too recognised that Shipman
might have reassured him about most of those cases. However, in two cases, he thought
that his level of concern would have been such that he would have referred the death to
the coroner.
Conclusions
16.49 Had Dr Hinchliffe undertaken a review of the forms so as to see the ‘whole picture’ and had
she not always been prepared to assume (as she was when giving evidence to the Inquiry)
that the Form C doctor had considered and been satisfied by Shipman’s explanation for
any lacuna or inconsistency in the information he had provided on Form B, she would have
found it necessary to contact Shipman to discuss the content of Form B on many
occasions. Although I have little doubt that Shipman would, on each occasion, have
provided a plausible explanation for the cause of death he had given, I do not think that
398
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Dr Hinchliffe could have failed to notice the frequency with which she had to contact him.
I believe that, had it been her practice to scrutinise the ‘whole picture’, she would from time
to time have had to contact other doctors besides Shipman. The Inquiry examined a large
number of Forms B completed by other doctors practising in the Hyde area. From that
examination, it appears to me most unlikely that Dr Hinchliffe would have had to contact
any other doctor anything like as frequently as would have been necessary with Shipman.
The Failure to Recognise Unusual Features Apparent from the Forms
16.50 Shipman’s Forms B showed that he was present at 42 deaths for which Dr Hinchliffe
authorised the cremations. Her evidence about whether she had noticed that Shipman
was often present at the deaths of his patients was somewhat confused. Initially, she said
that she had not noticed this feature but that, if she had, she would have attributed it to her
belief that he was an attentive doctor who was willing to visit his patients. Later, she said
that she had noticed this feature and had attributed it to this belief. I think it unlikely that
she had in fact noticed this feature at all.
16.51 Dr Hinchliffe also believes that she noticed the cluster of three deaths, which I have
already mentioned, for which she authorised cremation on 13th March 1995. These were
the deaths of Mrs Netta Ashcroft, Mrs Lily Bardsley and Mrs Maria West. Dr Hinchliffe
does not appear to have noticed the common features of these deaths. They were all
deaths at home, occurring in the presence of or very shortly after a visit from Shipman and
all were sudden in nature; as a group, they were therefore very unusual. This was in stark
contrast to the nine other cremations that Dr Hinchliffe authorised that day. Those deaths
all occurred in a hospital or other institution. All nine had a cause of death that suggested
a prior illness of some duration. By contrast, Shipman’s three patients appeared to have
died suddenly of coronary thrombosis or cardiovascular accident of short duration. Yet
Dr Hinchliffe attributed this cluster of deaths to coincidence. I accept that coincidences
do occur and I have already accepted that it might be a coincidence that three out of 12
deaths in one day had been certified by one doctor. However, if Dr Hinchliffe had
considered the ‘whole picture’ of each death, she would surely have noticed that all three
of Shipman’s deaths were different from the other nine. If she had had any personal
experience of dying patients, she would surely have realised that the circumstances of
Shipman’s three cases were most unusual.
16.52 In all the circumstances, it is not surprising that Dr Hinchliffe did not notice these features.
As she was performing little more than a clerical check, her knowledge of each death
would have been of a piecemeal nature, so that she would not readily have noticed the
common features of the death. Had she been looking at the ‘whole picture’, it is possible
that, in particular when clusters of deaths occurred, Dr Hinchliffe would have become
aware that the deaths of Shipman’s patients had unusual characteristics. However, having
regard to her lack of experience of general practice or of patients who had died, it is also
possible that she might not have appreciated that the characteristics were indeed
unusual. She might have continued, for example, to attribute one of the most striking of
such characteristics, presence at or shortly before death, to Shipman’s habit of visiting his
patients on demand.
399
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
16.53 As Deputy Medical Referee, Dr Holme did not deal with the same number or similar
clusters of deaths. Shipman was present at or shortly before the deaths of 13 of the
patients whose cremations she authorised. It is unlikely that she would have noticed the
fact of Shipman’s presence, or any other unusual characteristics of the deaths, for the
same reasons as Dr Hinchliffe. In any event, she saw far fewer Shipman deaths and had
a correspondingly smaller opportunity of observing their characteristics.
Other Medical Referees
16.54 The Inquiry also examined the forms relating to cremations of Shipman’s patients that were
authorised by other medical referees and deputy medical referees who officiated at the
Dukinfield and Stockport crematoria. They dealt with few such deaths and even fewer
cases where Shipman had killed. On the basis of their evidence, and the comments of
Dr Pledger and Dr Morgan, who had looked at the forms, I did not regard it as appropriate
to level any criticism against those referees in respect of the cremations which they
authorised. I did note that one of them described in his Inquiry statement how he had
reported deaths to the coroner on a number of occasions, usually because the deceased
had undergone an operation shortly before death. On one occasion, he reported a death
because he suspected (correctly, as it turned out) that the deceased had committed
suicide.
16.55 The Inquiry conducted some very small-scale research into the performance of medical
referees at other crematoria. Cremation forms covering two periods of three months were
obtained from four crematoria. Analysis of those forms showed that, at three of the four
crematoria, no notes made by medical referees on Forms B related to queries about the
cause of death. Whilst the Forms B were generally completed to a reasonably good
standard, the fact that no questions about the cause of death were raised, even in those
cases where the picture was not completely clear or consistent, suggests that the medical
referee concerned may not have adopted a very critical or enquiring approach.
Conclusions
16.56 I have already referred to the limited amount of information contained on completed
cremation forms. However, it is usually possible to gain some impression of the
circumstances of the death, based on the information provided by the Form B doctor.
Neither Dr Hinchliffe nor Dr Holme undertook any assessment of the ‘whole picture’
presented by the cremation forms. Dr Hinchliffe claimed that she did but I have rejected
her evidence. Dr Holme never claimed to have done so.
16.57 Had either of them done so, they would have found many Forms B in which the information
provided by Shipman was inadequate or inconsistent. For Dr Hinchliffe, in particular, this
would have meant that it was quite often necessary for her to speak to him to clarify the
picture. Dr Hinchliffe would have found it necessary to speak to him considerably more
often than she had to speak to other general practitioners.
16.58 Had Dr Hinchliffe carried out such an assessment and had she had the benefit of a more
appropriate medical background, including greater experience of general practice, she
400
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
would have realised that there were unusual features among the deaths of Shipman’s
patients. In particular, I think she would have probably noticed the common features of the
three sets of forms that she examined on 13th March 1995.
16.59 I have already said that I am reluctant to criticise either of these medical referees for the
way in which they approached their duties. Nor can I criticise them personally for their lack
of relevant medical experience. It was the fault of the system that they were appointed,
despite such lack of experience. They were not given any formal training or even provided
with a handbook of advice. The only instruction available was from the previous Medical
Referee. It may well be that Dr Thomas Holme was under the same misapprehension
about his role and passed this on to Dr Hinchliffe, who in turn passed it to Dr Jane Holme.
There was no contact with other medical referees, with consequent absence of the means
of learning that others might be carrying out the job differently and more effectively
elsewhere. Further, the circumstances in which the job was performed, especially the
pressure created by timing, encouraged the feeling that the job was a straightforward
clerical exercise with the minimum of enquiry needed.
16.60 The evidence available to the Inquiry suggests that there are medical referees who
perform their duties as they ought and who use their powers to institute appropriate
enquiries and even to order autopsies on occasions. However, it appears that there are
many (possibly the majority) who are not so active. This was certainly the view of the
Brodrick Committee. The results of the survey conducted by the Home and Health
Department of the Scottish Office in 1994/5, to which I have referred in Chapter Three,
suggested that medical referees in Scotland were not performing to a high standard.
There is no reason to suppose that practice has been any better south of the border. This
is not surprising, given the lack of training or guidance and the isolation in which medical
referees operate.
16.61 I conclude that, whilst the performance of Dr Hinchliffe, and (to a lesser extent) Dr Holme,
fell short of that which might have been expected from the best of their colleagues, it is
unlikely to have been significantly different from that of many other medical referees in
England and Wales.
16.62 Had Dr Hinchliffe and Dr Holme had the benefit of relevant medical experience and had
they realised that they were expected to undertake a careful assessment of the forms, they
would have found inadequacies and inconsistencies in many of them. This should have
led them to question Shipman. It is highly likely that, in any given case, he would have been
able to proffer an explanation which would have satisfied them, just as it had already
satisfied the Form C doctor. However, had there been a repeated need to contact
Shipman and to ask similar questions in relation to cases with similar characteristics, this
might well have led to concerns about his competence to complete the forms, possibly
about his competence as a doctor and possibly even as to his honesty. Repeated
questions directed at him might have acted to deter him from pursuing his criminal
activities. However, the real possibility exists that he would merely have become more
careful, would have modified his form-filling techniques to meet the requirements of the
medical referees and would have thus ensured that his deaths passed through the system
without question. He would have known that he could enter false information on the forms
401
SHIP03$$28 09-06-03 13:47:25 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
at little risk of any cross-check being made as to the accuracy or truth of that information.
Even had the medical referees exercised their power to order an autopsy, or referred a
death to the coroner for him to do so, it would not have revealed evidence of criminal
activity in the absence of toxicological tests.
16.63 I doubt very much that, even if the medical referees had performed their duties in a more
critical manner, the course of Shipman’s killing would have been changed.
402
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
The Inquiry’s Consultation Process: Responses to the
Discussion Paper, the Seminars andthe Feasibility Study
Introduction
17.1 In October 2002, the Inquiry issued a Discussion Paper, ‘Developing a NewSystem for
Death Certification’, which presented a ‘working model’ for a revised death investigation
and certification system. The working model, which represented the Inquiry’s preliminary
ideas, was based on a redesigned coroner service, with medically and legally qualified
coroners working side by side, but fulfilling different functions. Under the working model,
the medical coroner would be responsible for investigating and determining all issues
relating to the medical cause of death. The judicial coroner would determine the more
complex factual issues and disputes and, where appropriate, would conduct an inquest.
Both coroners would be supported by a team of trained investigators. The system would
have a defined leadership, providing training, continuing education, advice and audit.
Within the Discussion Paper was a set of forms designed by the Inquiry for use during the
process of death investigation and certification. Those forms would replace the current
MCCD and the cremation forms.
17.2 The purpose of publishing the Discussion Paper was to provide a focus, both for written
responses and for discussion at a series of seminars held by the Inquiry in January 2003.
The Inquiry received written responses to the Discussion Paper from 154 individuals and
organisations. A list of those who submitted responses (‘respondents’) appears at
Appendix E of this Report.
17.3 The seminars were spread over a period of nine days and covered the following topics:
(1) Preliminary observations at the scene of death and certification of the fact of death.
(2) Certification of the cause of death and identification of those deaths which require
investigation.
(3) Systems for the investigation and certification of death in other jurisdictions (held
over two days).
(4) How a medical coroner system might work: interface with the judicial coroner, the
police and other investigative agencies (held over three days).
(5) The role of post-mortem investigations and possible alternatives and/or adjuncts to
the full invasive investigation.
(6) The new-style forms.
17.4 The Inquiry invited a number of organisations with a particular interest or involvement in
post-death procedures to nominate representatives to take part in the seminars. Those
organisations included the British Medical Association (BMA), the Royal College of
General Practitioners (RCGP), the Royal College of Physicians (RCP), the Faculty of Public
Health Medicine, Cruse Bereavement Care (Cruse), the Royal College of Pathologists
403
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
(RCPath), the British Association in Forensic Medicine, the Department of Health (DoH),
the Office for National Statistics (ONS), the Coroners’ Society of England and Wales (the
Coroners’ Society), the Coroner’s Officers Association, the National Confidential Enquiry
into Perioperative Deaths (NCEPOD), the Retained Organs Commission, the Board of
Deputies of British Jews, the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) and the
ambulance services. In addition, the Inquiry extended invitations to a number of
individuals with a particular knowledge of post-death procedures.
17.5 Participants in the seminars submitted written responses to the Discussion Paper in
advance and expanded on those responses during the course of discussion at the
seminars. The discussions were led by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry and covered a wide
range of topics, including many of the issues which had been raised by respondents to the
Discussion Paper. Persons attending the seminars as observers were able to raise points
through Counsel for the consideration of seminar participants. I found the seminars of real
value. Hearing the Stage Two evidence had already changed some of my preliminary
views and, before the seminars began, my ideas were in a state of flux. In bringing
together a range of opinions on each contentious issue, the seminars helped me to reach
conclusions about the system I should recommend.
17.6 A list of the participants who attended the seminars appears at Appendix F of this Report.
Further written responses have been received since the seminars and these too have
been taken into account. Mr Tom Luce, Chair of the Coroners Review, attended for two
days of the seminars and made a short statement, setting out the Review’s provisional
conclusions as at January 2003. It was extremely helpful to me to be made aware of those
provisional conclusions at that stage.
17.7 In the course of this Chapter, I shall refer to some of the most significant points raised in
the written responses received by the Inquiry and in the discussions that took place during
the course of the seminars. I shall deal with the seminars relating to the systems in other
jurisdictions in Chapter Eighteen. I have already referred in Chapter Ten to discussions
which took place at the seminar on post-mortem investigations.
The Objectives of a RevisedSystem for Death Investigation andCertification
17.8 The Discussion Paper suggested a number of objectives for a revised death certification
system. Such a system must be effective in minimising any risk of the concealment of the
fact that a death has been caused unlawfully. Given the background to the Inquiry and the
findings contained in my First Report, that must be a primary objective. However, it cannot
be the only one. The system should also, insofar as possible, provide reliable and
accurate data about the cause of death. This is important because such data provides the
statistical and epidemiological information necessary to plan health services and public
health strategies, to evaluate their effectiveness and to identify and deal with threats to the
health of the population or public safety. The Discussion Paper laid particular emphasis
on the need to obtain full and accurate information about the circumstances in which the
death occurred and about the deceased person’s state of health before death. The better
the quality of this information, the more accurate the diagnosis of cause of death is likely
to be. Such information is also necessary in order to determine which deaths require
404
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
investigation. One objective of the system must be to ensure that information of the best
possible quality is available for these purposes.
17.9 The Discussion Paper also suggested that there was a need for the system to be
understood by those people (usually bereaved relatives) most closely affected by it. It was
envisaged that relatives could and should be involved in the investigation and certification
process to a much greater degree than under the existing system. The system must also
be capable of meeting, wherever possible, the needs and expectations of the bereaved,
including those who, for religious or cultural reasons, wish to bury or cremate their dead
within a very short period after death.
17.10 In consultation, the suggested objectives met with broad approval. Some respondents
drewattention to the obvious tension that exists between the objectives of collecting as
full and accurate information as possible about the death and of meeting the needs and
expectations of the bereaved. It was suggested that any revised system should not be so
unwieldy as to cause distress to the bereaved relatives or undue delay in disposing of the
dead. The need for independence on the part of those charged with the task of
investigating deaths was also emphasised. A number of respondents stressed the need
for the system to ensure that lessons were learned from deaths found to have been
preventable. This is an aspect that is central to the systems operated in some of the other
jurisdictions about which the Inquiry heard during the seminars. Professor Stephen
Cordner, Professor of Forensic Medicine and Director of the Victorian Institute of Forensic
Medicine, who attended the third seminar, suggested that the appropriate objectives in
an effective system of death investigation and certification would be:
‘... to accurately identify the deceased and to elicit the proper cause and
circumstances of the death so that justice is advanced, that duties to the
bereaved (and the deceased) ... are discharged and so that the
community interest is servedby learning for the purposes of death and
injury prevention’.
17.11 I shall refer to Professor Cordner’s views, and those of the other international contributors,
in Chapter Eighteen.
The Bereaved– ShouldThey Be Involvedin the Death Certification Process?
17.12 The Inquiry’s Discussion Paper envisaged that, in any future system of death investigation
and certification, there should be much closer involvement of the deceased’s family in the
post-death procedures, particularly in providing and receiving information about the
circumstances of the death and in verifying information given by the treating doctor and
others. This proposal received widespread support although some respondents
suggested that relatives might be distressed by, and resent as intrusive, questions about
the circumstances of the deceased’s death. At the seminars, Mrs Anne Viney,
representing Cruse, referred to the need of bereaved people for accurate information and
honest explanation. She believed that most relatives would welcome an increased role in
the post-death procedures and the opportunity of contributing any knowledge that they
might have about the cause and circumstances of the death. She said that an impression
405
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
that information is being concealed could impair the grieving process. She believed that
those working in the coroner system could be trained to deal sensitively with families. She
stressed the need to treat bereaved families ‘like grown-ups’ and to be aware that people’s
imaginings, or lack of knowledge, are often more distressing than being informed of the
true facts.
17.13 Some respondents to the Discussion Paper expressed concern that greater involvement
of families could result in delay in the conclusion of post-death procedures. Mrs Viney
suggested that ‘delay’ meant a period of time that is greater than some expectation on the
part of the public. In the context of a newsystem, the public would have to be clearly
informed of how long the certification process (with and without an autopsy) could be
expected to take and the system would have to be carefully costed and appropriately
staffed so as to meet the expectations produced by that information. Targets and time
limits should be set, performance should be monitored and the results published. A
response submitted by Cruse after the seminars expanded upon this topic. It suggested
that, once the public understood that the main aim of the system proposed for the future
was to prevent untimely deaths and improve public health and safety, people were likely
to accept that the timescale between a death and the funeral might, in some cases, be
longer than at present. The important thing was for relatives to know what to expect, so as
to be able to make plans and feel in control of their situation to a greater extent than at
present. Cruse suggested that there should be a maximum period of no more than ten
days between death and release of the body for burial or cremation, with the expectation
that, in most cases, bodies would be released within a shorter period. Within such a
timescale, arrangements would have to be made, wherever possible, to meet the needs
and expectations of those minority groups whose religion or culture demanded an early
funeral. Cruse also drewattention to the change in attitude, which I referred to in Chapter
Four, whereby families now wish to have the body of a deceased relative removed from
the house as soon as possible. This is in contrast to the tradition in the past, which was to
keep the body at home, where relatives and friends would visit to pay their respects. Cruse
suggested that a return to such a tradition would have a number of advantages; in
particular, it was said that it would assist the bereaved in the grieving process. It might
also, it was suggested, reduce pressure on the death investigation and certification
system. Whether the public would be amenable to this sort of change, however, must be
open to doubt.
17.14 Although respondents broadly welcomed the proposal for greater involvement of the
family in the post-death procedures, they were not entirely unanimous in their support. In
its written response to the Coroners Review, the Coroners’ Society referred to the risk that
bereaved relatives might try to influence the certification process. The Society observed
that:
‘... it is difficult to see how the majority of the bereaved can play a
meaningful part in the process of certification, other than to try and
influence its outcome, possibly for dubious reasons’.
Comment
17.15 In my viewthis attitude towards bereaved families is mistaken. It may be that a fewfamilies
might seek to influence the outcome of the certification process. However, if that risk
406
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
exists, it must be taken. There are two powerful reasons why that is so. First, common
humanity demands that bereaved relatives should be treated with due consideration. I
accept the views expressed, which accord with my own experience, that the bereaved
generally prefer to be involved than to be excluded and usually welcome open and honest
explanations. Second, the relatives and friends of the deceased constitute a valuable
source of information, which may be vital to the proper investigation of the death. That
source must be used. I accept that there is a risk that consultation with families might delay
the certification process. That risk can be minimised by the provision of adequate
resources.
The Desirability andFeasibility of Creating a New Role of Medical Coroner
17.16 In general, as I have explained, no medical expertise is currently available within the office
of a coroner who has only legal qualifications. Advice may be obtained from time to time
from the pathologists regularly instructed by the coroner. However, most of the decisions
made by the coroner and his/her staff are taken without the benefit of independent medical
advice. There was almost universal agreement among respondents that the introduction
of some medical expertise into the coroner’s office would be desirable in a revised system.
There was, however, a division of opinion as to how this should be achieved.
17.17 There was a considerable amount of support for the principle of creating a post of medical
coroner. For the ONS, Dr Peter Goldblatt, Chief Medical Statistician, welcomed the idea
of a locally operated service, independent of health care providers, that would supervise
the certification and investigation of deaths. He enumerated the benefits of such a service,
including the potential for the medical coroner to monitor, and thus to improve, the quality
of death certification, to educate the public and the medical profession in the working of
the system, to monitor local mortality trends and to provide good quality mortality data and
other information for use by the ONS and other agencies. Dr Goldblatt pointed out that, if
the role of medical coroner were to command the respect of the medical profession, it
would have to be equal in status to that of a consultant or principal in general practice and
to have recognised standards of postgraduate training and specialist accreditation. Many
other respondents echoed the points made by Dr Goldblatt. Mrs Marcia Fry, representing
the DoH, expressed the Department’s viewthat the suggested system would promote
public health, public safety and public confidence.
17.18 The BMA also expressed the viewthat the introduction of a medical coroner had much to
commend it. The main concern of the Association was whether, given current workforce
shortages, the medical profession could provide enough suitably qualified candidates to
fulfil the role. This was a concern that was shared by many respondents from within the
medical profession and it was a theme that recurred throughout the seminars. The
response of Dr John Grenville, a general practitioner who attended one of the seminars,
was typical of many others. He pointed to the shortage of doctors within the UK and
doubted whether many doctors would be attracted to work as medical coroners. Plainly,
recruitment is a real problem at present, particularly in the field of pathology and, to a
lesser but significant extent, in general practice. However, Dr Anne Thorpe, representing
the BMA, believed that there might be little difficulty in recruiting candidates who were 20
years or so into their careers and looking for a change. She observed that, in order for that
407
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
to be so, there would have to be a proper career structure, with appropriate professional
support and terms and conditions (in particular, remuneration), commensurate with the
importance of the position. For the DoH, Mrs Fry agreed with Dr Thorpe that there would
be a pool of doctors wishing to leave clinical practice and seeking an alternative. Medical
coroners could be recruited from that pool. The Department’s viewwas that such people
would leave clinical practice in any event. They would not, therefore, be ‘lost’ to front line
clinical practice solely because of the creation of the newposition of medical coroner.
17.19 Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit
at the University of Leicester and himself a general practitioner, understood and shared
the concerns of his colleagues about manpower shortages. However, he believed the
solution was to approach the introduction of the revised system slowly and carefully.
Doctors would need to be identified and trained to operate the system. It was important
that they fully understood exactly what the system was intended to achieve. Professor
Baker suggested that they might benefit from having some exposure to the systems in
other jurisdictions about which the Inquiry had heard. He felt that it was only by proceeding
with caution that the opportunities for creating a really first class system would be realised.
17.20 A number of coroners who responded to the Discussion Paper were completely opposed
to the idea of a medical coroner and expressed the strong viewthat the objectives
identified by the Inquiry could be achieved under the existing coronial system. In general,
however, coroners accepted the need for the introduction of medical expertise into the
coronial service. They took the viewthat the role of the person providing the medical
expertise should be very limited and should be of an advisory and audit nature only. The
Law Society agreed with this view. It contended that the separate but parallel jurisdictions
of the medical and judicial coroners suggested by the Inquiry would give rise to potential
conflict between the two, as well as to confusion in the mind of the public. Mr Christopher
Dorries, HM Coroner for South Yorkshire (West), observed in his written response that the
proposals would be ‘a breeding ground for professional rivalries’. There was obvious
concern about the impact of the introduction of medical coroners upon the existing legally
qualified (or ‘judicial’) coroners. Mr Michael Rose, HM Coroner for the Western District of
Somersetshire, expressed the fear that the medical coroner would ‘usurp the functions’
of the existing coroner and ‘consequently sever the close connection between him
andthe area he serves’. He was afraid that the work of the judicial coroner would decline
and thus what he termed ‘one of the many counterbalances to the excesses of
Government’ would be removed. A number of respondents expressed the hope that, if
the Inquiry’s suggestions were implemented, both medical and judicial coroners would be
placed within the same agency.
Comment
17.21 In my view, there is an urgent need for coroners with medical qualification. Many of the
decisions nowtaken by legally qualified coroners depend upon medical judgement. In my
view, it will not be sufficient (nor would it be appropriate) for the medical ‘person’ in the
coroner’s office to be of a lower status to that of the legally qualified coroner. I do not share
Mr Dorries’ concern that a lawyer and a doctor could not work together without damaging
professional rivalry. There might in some cases be a clash of personalities; that can
408
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
happen in any organisation. I see no reason why it should arise particularly in a coroner’s
office. If a judicial and medical coroner were to work as part of the same team, each would
have his/her own functions to perform and, where any decision called for both medical and
legal knowledge or judgement, each would benefit from the other’s contribution.
17.22 Insofar as the proposals might result in a reduction in the amount of work done by judicial
coroners, I can only see that as a benefit. I do not accept that a local population would be
less well served by a medically qualified coroner than one with legal qualifications. Nor
do I accept that the changes proposed would in any way diminish whatever effect, if any,
coroners presently have on Government. The evidence I have heard suggests that some
coroners are overworked and give insufficient time (and possibly attention) to those duties
for which they are not well qualified personally.
17.23 I recognise that the creation of a number of medical coroner posts would place a strain on
the resources of the medical profession. However, it seems to be generally accepted that
some medical expertise must be employed on coronial work. I am encouraged by the view
expressed by the representatives of the DoH and BMA that, provided that the terms and
conditions provide a proper career structure, there will be a pool of suitable candidates
for the post of medical coroner. Moreover, these doctors would be seeking a change of
direction in their careers and would be likely to leave clinical practice in any event.
The Position of the Medical Coroner within the System
17.24 The Discussion Paper sought views as to the way in which the system should be
structured. Views were also invited about how best to assure the independence of medical
coroners from those parts of the NHS responsible for delivering patient care, whilst not
causing them to become professionally isolated. The need for independence (certainly
from local NHS Trusts with whom their duties might bring them into a conflict of interest)
was widely understood and accepted and the tension between independence from the
NHS and professional isolation well recognised among respondents. A range of solutions
was offered.
Shouldthe Medical Coroner Be Integratedwithin Existing National Health Service
Structures?
17.25 Some respondents believed that it would be possible for medical coroners to be
employed by the newStrategic Health Authorities (SHAs) and still retain their
independence. In its written response to the Discussion Paper, the RCPath expressed that
view. The College regarded that as appropriate in view of the responsibility that the
medical coroner would have for the accuracy of epidemiological data and also because
medical coroners were likely to be recruited from NHS personnel. However, during the
seminars, Dr Peter Acland, representing the RCPath, acknowledged his personal view
that problems might be caused, for example, when a medical coroner was investigating
a death that might have been caused by clinical malpractice at a local hospital. The public
might well not perceive an individual employed by an SHA as truly independent of the
Trust responsible for operating the hospital. Dr Thorpe, for the BMA, could see arguments
for and against medical coroners being placed within NHS structures. The position of the
409
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
medical coroner would be a new one and the career path as yet uncharted. There was an
obvious danger of professional isolation. There were links with public health that made it
attractive to locate medical coroners within the SHAs. On the other hand, that would give
rise to a division of accountability between medical and judicial coroners (who plainly
could not be placed within the NHS), which would be undesirable. Placing the medical
coroner within a unified coronial system might be more appropriate. Dr Thorpe also
stressed the need for the medical coroner to be seen as independent of all medical
structures. This issue of public confidence in the independence of the system was
emphasised in a number of responses to the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper.
17.26 The DoH favoured the location of the medical coroner service within the Government
Offices of the Regions. Medical coroners would be independent officers, accountable to
regional directors of public health and, through them, to the Chief Medical Officer (CMO).
The Department’s view was that this would solve the potential problem of professional
isolation and would provide leadership, stability and continuity. Mrs Fry, speaking on
behalf of the Department, felt that the fact that the accountability of medical and judicial
coroners would lie in different directions would not present an insurmountable problem.
She made the point that regional directors of public health are not involved in the
day-to-day management and performance management of the Health Service and are
directly accountable to the CMO, whom the public sees as independent of individual
doctors at local level.
Is There Any Alternative to Integration within Existing NHS Structures?
17.27 In its response to the Discussion Paper, the Retained Organs Commission suggested that
a new‘arm’s length’ body should be established, along the lines of the Special Health
Authorities. Examples of such Authorities are the National Clinical Assessment Authority
(NCAA) and the Retained Organs Commission itself. The Commission’s response
suggested that the service could have a dual relationship with the DoH and the Lord
Chancellor’s Department (nowpart of the Department for Constitutional Affairs), thus
balancing the need for quasi-judicial independence and a degree of integration into the
public health system. The Commission recognised that practical problems might flowfrom
responsibility resting with two Government Departments, but felt that the benefits of the
scheme would outweigh the problems. Another consultee suggested that a new body
should be set up under the joint auspices of the DoH and the Home Office, in order to
provide national leadership and accountability. Others felt that the coroner service as a
whole should be accountable to the Home Office.
17.28 In its written response to the Discussion Paper, the Coroners’ Society said that, in order to
achieve independence from clinicians, medical coroners should be employed by the
ONS. However, by the time of the seminars, Mr Michael Burgess, Honorary Secretary of
the Society, no longer favoured that solution. He supported the idea of a single integrated
service, comprising both medical and judicial coroners and wholly independent from the
NHS. He could see no reason why medical coroners, like existing coroners, should not be
office-holders under the Crown. The Coroner’s Officers Association strongly favoured
independence from local authorities, health authorities, the police service and any other
410
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
organisation that might have an interest in the death. The Association regarded the Lord
Chancellor’s Department (nowpart of the Department for Constitutional Affairs) as one
possible location for the service.
17.29 The Society of Registration Officers suggested that the office of medical coroner should
be a statutory post, independent from the NHS, with accountability passing up to a Chief
Medical Coroner (the Society favoured the term ‘Medical Examiner’) at the head of a
free-standing national agency. The Tameside Families Support Group suggested the
creation of a similar agency with the difference that, under the Group’s model, the medical
coroner would be accountable to the judicial coroner and, at the head of the agency, to
the Chief Coroner. The Greater Manchester Police supported the creation of a statutory
medical and judicial coroner service, accountable to an independent body which would
be responsible for establishing and maintaining consistent procedures and standards
nationwide. The police are particularly anxious to see uniformity of practice throughout the
service. They, more than any other organisation, experience the problems caused by
inconsistent practices and procedures operated by coroners in different districts.
17.30 Professor Baker emphasised the need for those employed in the medical coroner service
not only to be seen to be independent, but also to be independent in their attitudes,
behaviour and understanding. However, that independence must, he said, be coupled
with membership of a wider network ensuring professional development, regulation and
continuing education. On the evidence of what was being done in other countries, he felt
that all this was possible with proper leadership and management, even within a freestanding
service. There would, he thought, be a sufficient number and hierarchy of
medical coroners to achieve a degree of professional vitality, if the service could be
formally associated with one of the Royal Colleges, which would assume the leadership
and educational roles. Professor Baker also sawa role for some sort of administrative link
with an NHS organisation, possibly the Commission for Health Improvement (shortly to be
subsumed into the newCommission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection). Many of the
other respondents to the Discussion Paper and participants in the seminars spoke of the
need for continuing professional links so that medical coroners would be able to avoid
professional isolation and maintain an up-to-date knowledge of current clinical practice
and procedures.
Comment
17.31 The focus of these discussions was what the position of the medical coroner should be
within the system. However, on reflection, it seems to me that the real question is what
the position of the newcoroner service should be. A structure or ‘home’ must be found
for the whole service, not just the medical coroners. The discussion was most useful
nonetheless. It highlighted the need for independence from Government and from
existing NHS structures, which I fully accept. It drew attention to the need for both
medical and judicial coroners to be independent office-holders under the Crown. It
brought home to me howdifficult a question the ‘placement’ of the coroner service will
be. As will become apparent, I find the suggestion made by the Retained Organs
411
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Commission to be the most appropriate. I shall propose the creation of a special ‘arm’s
length’ body.
The Medical Coroner
What Qualifications Will Be Required?
17.32 In its Discussion Paper, the Inquiry suggested that the position of medical coroner might
be suitable for clinicians from a range of different medical backgrounds, including
forensic pathologists, public health doctors and police surgeons, as well as doctors with
a background in general practice. Further categories were suggested by respondents to
the Discussion Paper. These included senior hospital doctors, medically qualified
coroners, doctors with medico-legal experience, general histopathologists with an
interest in autopsy, epidemiologists, crematorium medical referees and forensic medical
examiners.
17.33 There was general agreement that doctors from a variety of medical backgrounds would
be suitable for the post. Dr Thorpe, representing the BMA, suggested that the ideal
candidate for the post of medical coroner would be someone with a broad medical
background and therefore with experience and understanding of many aspects of
medicine, rather than an expert in a specialised area. However, there would be a
necessity for specialist advice to be available when required.
17.34 Professor Baker originally suggested that the most suitably qualified doctors for the post
would be public health doctors; they would be best placed to carry out a monitoring
role and to use mortality data in determining the provision of local health services. At
the seminars, however, Professor Baker agreed that the net could be cast wider. A
number of respondents to the Discussion Paper suggested that public health doctors
were unsuitable for the role because of their detachment from clinical practice. It was
argued by some, including the NCEPOD, that public health doctors would not be
appropriate candidates for the post unless they had substantial recent clinical
experience. Professor Baker disagreed with that view. He acknowledged that some
public health doctors were so distant from clinical practice that they would find it difficult
to take on the role. However, many would be able to do so. He pointed out that public
health physicians have a degree of detachment, together with the positive advantage
of experience in evaluating the care given to patients. This viewreceived some support,
notably from Dr Gary Cook, of the Faculty of Public Health Medicine.
17.35 Some respondents thought that doctors currently working as crematorium medical
referees would be ideal candidates for the job of medical coroner. A response from
Dr W D S McLay, on behalf of the newly re-formed Association of Crematorium Medical
Referees and the Association of Police Surgeons, suggested that, with appropriate
resources and statutory authority, the existing role of the medical referee could be
extended to cover many of the functions that the Discussion Paper envisaged being
undertaken by the medical coroner.
17.36 It was generally acknowledged that, in order to function effectively, the medical coroner
system would need to command the respect of the medical profession and that only
412
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
doctors of high standing and an appropriate level of experience should be eligible for
the job.
Comment
17.37 In my view, doctors from a wide range of medical backgrounds should be capable, after
appropriate training, of undertaking the work of a medical coroner. One aspect that was
not mentioned by the contributors, which I regard as important, is that some administrative
ability would be an asset.
What Sort of Training WouldBe Required?
17.38 There was general agreement that, from whatever background a medical coroner came,
an appropriate training programme would be essential. Ideas were put forward for a
specific training course, leading to formal accreditation. Such a course would clearly need
to cover a wide variety of the aspects of the work of the medical coroner. A number of key
needs were identified, including training in forensic medicine, in the management of
bereaved relatives and in the understanding of the needs of ethnic minority groups and,
in particular, their religious and cultural requirements. The Royal College of Paediatrics
and Child Health suggested that an understanding of child health and sudden
unexpected death in infancy would be required. At the seminars, the possibility of having
that kind of expertise available at a regional level was discussed. It was suggested a
medical coroner would require some statistical and epidemiological knowledge.
However, this would need to be at a basic level only. Every medical coroner would
obviously have to possess an understanding of the legal and ethical issues surrounding
death.
Comment
17.39 The contributors have identified the core requirements. It seems to me that the basic
training of medical coroners should not present any great difficulty. In the longer term, a
specific course leading to accreditation might be feasible and would, I think, promote the
maintenance of high standards.
Would It Be Possible to Provide a Career Structure for Medical Coroners?
17.40 Under the current coronial system, there is no career structure beyond local level. Once
a deputy coroner has been appointed to the post of coroner within a district, there is no
further potential for promotion within the coronial system, save (for a part-timer) the
possibility of moving to one of the fewfull-time positions.
17.41 There was broad support for the introduction of a regional and national structure within the
coroner system. One of the advantages of such a structure is that it would provide a career
structure for medical coroners, which would make the post more attractive to potential
applicants. At the seminars, Dr Stephen Leadbeatter, Director of the Wales Institute of
Forensic Medicine, suggested that doctors might occupy the post of medical coroner for
a given period, as part of a wider career structure. The DoH also envisaged that some
413
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
medical coroners might spend only a fewyears in the service before moving on
elsewhere.
17.42 A further perceived advantage of a regional and national structure is the ability to provide
support for medical coroners acting at local level, offering expertise and guidance where
required. It was suggested by a number of respondents that, insofar as possible, medical
coroners should work in teams to encourage professional inclusion. It was thought
desirable that such teams should incorporate, where possible, a range of different skills
and backgrounds of expertise. Specialist skills should also be available for use as and
when required.
Comment
17.43 I am unsure whether there will be a real need for a career structure for medical coroners,
other than by the progression from work at a district level to work at regional level.
However, I do recognise that, if a doctor becomes a medical coroner, s/he should not be
trapped in the post and unable to return to mainstream medicine if, for example s/he did
not enjoy the work. There are two aspects to this. First, the financial arrangements must
be such that the medical coroner could return to the NHS without loss of pension rights.
Second, medical coroners must not be isolated to the extent that they lose touch with
developments in clinical practice and with the ethos of the profession. However, they will
have to be quite independent of colleagues at a local level.
The Investigation of Individual Deaths
ShouldThere Be a List of Reportable Deaths?
17.44 Under the current system, a number of categories of death are reportable to the coroner.
There is no definitive list of reportable deaths, although the circumstances in which a
registrar must report a death and a coroner must hold an inquest are set out in the
Registration of Births and Deaths Regulations 1987 and the Coroners Act 1988
respectively.
17.45 The Discussion Paper set out a list of circumstances in which it was suggested that a death
should be reportable to the medical coroner. Respondents to the Discussion Paper put
forward a large number of suggested amendments and additions to the list. Many of the
suggested additions were very sensible. If incorporated, they would result in a list
containing more than 30 individual categories of death. There were differences of opinion
about the merit of including some of the circumstances suggested by the Inquiry. In
particular, there was a good deal of disquiet among members of the medical profession
at the suggestion that a death should be reportable where there was reason to suspect
that the death was or might have been caused by medical error or lack of treatment.
17.46 The responses illustrated the difficulties of compiling a complete and comprehensible list
of every circumstance that should give rise to a report to the coroner. It also illustrated the
impracticability of requiring every doctor to remember and apply such a list. There was
general agreement that any such list should be reviewed and updated regularly, so as to
keep pace with changing circumstances. Changes in the list would inevitably cause
414
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
further difficulties for the medical profession. In addition, the production of a list of
reportable deaths would merely serve to perpetuate the existing system whereby, in
general, the decision whether or not to report a death to the coroner lies with the
treating doctor.
17.47 At the seminars, two alternative solutions to the list of reportable deaths were considered.
The first was that all deaths should be reported to the medical coroner, except those within
a narrowly defined category (e.g. where the death was expected). This would represent
a complete reversal of the current system, under which a death is not reportable unless it
falls within certain categories. The second solution was that every death should be
referred to the medical coroner.
One Possible Solution – ShouldAll Deaths Be Reportable Except for the ExpectedDeath?
17.48 The Inquiry suggested that a death might not be reported to the medical coroner if it was
expected and had occurred as a result of a natural disease process. The cause of such
deaths would continue to be certified by the treating doctor, although there would be
additional safeguards. In particular, the deceased’s family would see the documentation
and have an opportunity to voice any concerns they might have.
17.49 If there were no requirement to examine expected deaths, the workload of the medical
coroner would obviously be significantly less than if all deaths were reported.
Dr Christopher Evans, representing the RCP, thought that over half of all deaths that
occurred on the general wards in hospital (as opposed to in the accident and emergency
department) were expected. Dr David Pickersgill, for the BMA, estimated that well over
half of all deaths occurring outside hospital (including deaths in community hospitals, care
homes, etc.) fell into that category. Dr Pickersgill did not, however, support the proposal
that only unexpected deaths should be referred to the medical coroner. He contended
that all deaths should be referred and argued that, if this were done, the expected deaths
could be dealt with very quickly.
17.50 A suggested definition of an ‘expecteddeath’ was set out in the Discussion Paper. This
was:
‘... a death where there was, prior to death, an expectation among those
around the deceased and his/her health care team that the death was
imminent’.
17.51 A number of respondents expressed the viewthat a death might be ‘expected’, even if
not ‘imminent’, and argued that the use of the word ‘imminent’ severely restricted the
range of deaths that would fall within the definition. Others were happy with the
requirement for imminence. The Tameside Family Support Group, for example,
suggested that a time limit should be set within which a death could properly be regarded
as ‘imminent’. A period of three months was proposed. Others suggested that there
should be a requirement that the fact that a death was imminent should have been formally
recorded in the medical records prior to the death occurring.
415
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
17.52 The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) suggested that the definition contained in the
Discussion Paper be qualified in the following way:
‘... where a diagnosis of the illness leading to the death being expected
has been confirmedandthere has been no untowardincident in the
period immediately prior to the death’.
17.53 That form of words recognises the fact that, although a death may be ‘expected’ at the time
it occurs, the condition that caused the death might have been precipitated by an event
(e.g. an accident or adverse medical event) which makes an investigation into the death
necessary. Dr Leadbeatter proposed the following definition, which encompasses both
the element of ‘expectedness’ and the requirement that the death should be examined in
the public interest:
‘An ‘expected death’ is ‘a death where there was, prior to death, an
expectation among those about the deceased and his/her healthcare
team that the death was imminent, and the underlying cause was known,
andthe cause was not violent or unnatural, andthe person hadnot been
‘deprived of liberty’’.’
17.54 The phrases ‘natural death’ and (to a lesser extent) ‘violent death’ cause considerable
difficulty and are interpreted in different ways by different people. One example, which
was the subject of discussion at the seminars, was the distinction to be drawn between
the ‘unnatural’ death caused by lung cancer resulting from exposure to asbestos at work
and the death (regarded under the existing system as ‘natural’) caused by lung cancer
resulting from smoking cigarettes. It was agreed that the distinction is essentially one of
social mores and is susceptible to change over time. Dr Ryk James, Senior Lecturer in
Forensic Pathology at the University of Wales, suggested at the seminars that a ‘natural’
death was one that raised no issue of criminality, of civil liability or of public interest and
was not attended by any complaint that might lead to any of those circumstances. There
was, however, a general feeling that the concepts of the ‘natural’ and ‘unnatural’ death
should be abandoned.
17.55 At the seminars, Dr Maureen Baker, representing the RCGP, suggested that, rather than
having a positive requirement that death had been ‘expected’ before a death could be
certified by a doctor, it might be easier to have a negative requirement that death was ‘not
unexpected’. This would cover, for example, a sudden death, apparently caused by a
heart attack, in a patient with known ischaemic heart disease. This point had been raised
by a number of respondents. During the course of discussion at the seminars, Dr Baker
accepted that, in the example of the patient with ischaemic heart disease, the treating
doctor would be able to offer only informed speculation as to the cause of death,
particularly if the death was not witnessed by anyone and there was no report of the patient
having exhibited the ‘classic’ signs of a heart attack. It is, after all, perfectly possible for a
patient suffering from heart disease to die from some other, wholly unrelated, cause.
17.56 Both Dr Pickersgill and Dr Baker anticipated difficulties in determining whether or not a
death had been ‘expected’ by the deceased’s family. Family members may have been
informed of the prognosis but may not have accepted it. Some may have been told but not
416
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
others. Mrs Viney was concerned that, if the fact that a death was ‘expected’ were to be
a significant factor, this may have the effect of forcing discussions about topics that
families might prefer to avoid.
17.57 Disquiet was expressed by some at the idea of treating expected deaths differently from
other deaths. In a response sent to the Inquiry after the seminars, Cruse expressed
concerns about the vulnerability of the terminally ill. The response pointed out that such
people can be subject to inadequate care and treatment, even to criminal acts. Other
respondents made similar points.
Comment
17.58 For several reasons, I have concluded that the idea of seeking to identify ‘expected
deaths’ for separate treatment at certification is unworkable. First, it has proved almost
impossible to define an ‘expected death’ in a simple but comprehensible way. Second, I
share the concern expressed by Cruse and others that such a system would increase the
vulnerability of the terminally ill to neglect or worse. I also reject as unacceptable (in the
light of the Shipman experience) the suggestion that all deaths save the ‘not unexpected’
should be referred to the coroner.
An Alternative Solution – ShouldAll Deaths Be Reportable?
17.59 It was argued by a number of respondents that any system that relies upon the reporting
of deaths to the coroner is flawed and that the medical coroner system could be effective
only if it scrutinised every death. This argument was advanced with particular force by
Dr James. He said that the proposal to retain a system of reportable deaths:
‘... retains one of the major weaknesses of the current system creating
potential loopholes for the future Shipman; will undermine the provision
of quality mortality data and will create unnecessary complexity’.
17.60 In Dr James’ experience, doctors frequently make wrong decisions about whether to
report a death, owing to a lack of understanding of the reporting requirements and the
relevant issues to be considered, or out of a desire to avoid further investigation. If the
present system of relying on third parties (mainly doctors) to report deaths to the coroner
were retained, a future Shipman might be able to exploit the system. He or she could
decide not to report a death and thereby to exclude the medical coroner’s involvement.
Dr James felt that the system would not enjoy public confidence. He pointed to the poor
quality of death certification at present. I have referred previously (see paragraph 5.44) to
research that he has conducted on this topic. His viewwas that the medical coroner
should certify the cause of death (or approve the cause of death, where a doctor has given
a provisional cause) in every case. Dr James’ viewwas shared by a large number of
respondents to the Discussion Paper, in particular coroners and pathologists. The
suggestion that every death should be reported to the medical coroner also received a
considerable amount of support from participants at the seminars.
17.61 On the other hand, there was a general recognition that a requirement that all deaths
should be reported to the coroner service would have very significant workload and
417
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
resource implications. Doubts were expressed as to whether the service would be able to
cope with the volume of work. The point was also made that, if all deaths were to be
reported to the medical coroner, investigative resources might not be focussed on those
cases where they were most needed. Concern was expressed about delays that might be
caused by the coroner service becoming overloaded with work.
17.62 The issue of whether or not the service was able to cope with the reporting of all deaths
would, of course, depend largely on the resources placed at its disposal. Plainly, the
present infrastructure would not be equal to the task. Much would also depend on the
extent to which the medical coroner and his/her staff undertook an investigation of the
deaths reported to them and the way in which that investigation was organised.
17.63 Mr Thomas Hennell, senior analyst at Government Office for the North West, who
participated in several of the seminars in his private capacity, said that the reporting of all
deaths to the medical coroner would have a number of advantages. It would enable the
medical coroner to co-ordinate all the post-death procedures. Such a system would also
ensure that a public record of the death was made at the earliest possible time and that
other agencies were informed promptly that the death had occurred. The medical coroner
would also be a valuable source of advice to the relatives as to how they should proceed.
Mr Hennell suggested that the medical coroner should not undertake a formal
investigation in every case. He proposed that the doctor who certified the fact of death
should send written notification of the death to the medical coroner (on the Inquiry’s Form
1). The medical coroner would then discuss with the doctor whether or not the doctor was
able to certify the cause of death. If it were concluded that the doctor was able to certify
the cause of death and there was no reason for the death to be investigated, the doctor
would be authorised to certify and the medical coroner would not conduct any
investigation into the death. In those circumstances, copies of the Inquiry’s Forms 1 and
2 (i.e. the forms used respectively to certify the fact and cause of death) would be
delivered to the registrar and the medical coroner’s office. With them would be the
Inquiry’s Form 3, which would contain a written account of events compiled by the
deceased’s family or carers. If any inconsistencies were noted, or if concern were
expressed at the point of registration, the medical coroner could take matters further.
Otherwise the death would be registered and disposal would follow.
Comment
17.64 I accept and agree with the concerns expressed by Dr James about the quality of
decisions made by doctors when asked to recognise which deaths should be reported to
the coroner. The alternative is that all deaths should be reported to the coroner. As
Mr Hennell pointed out, there would be a number of consequential advantages. The
resource implications would be considerable but, as Mr Hennell and Dr Pickersgill
observed, not all deaths would require an in-depth investigation by the medical coroner.
Much would depend upon how the deaths were handled in the coroner’s office.
Mr Hennell’s suggestion (or something very like it) might be workable.
Is There a Needfor a SecondDoctor?
17.65 Under the Inquiry’s working model, if a death were expected, the cause of death would be
certified by the treating doctor alone. There would be no examination or enquiry by a
418
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
second doctor. The responses to the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper revealed a strong feeling
in many quarters that reliance on certification by one doctor was inadequate and did not
afford sufficient protection, even within the limited category of expected deaths.
Dr Grenville proposed an alternative model, by which a panel of doctors, practising in
various fields of medicine, would be recruited to act as second certifiers on a part-time
or sessional basis. Members of the panel would be specially trained and would need to
demonstrate continuing competence in the field. They would have time to spend on the
task of certification and would not have to fit it in between their other duties. Their work
would be audited. The model would operate along broadly the same lines as the existing
cremation certification procedure. The treating doctor would certify the cause of death,
subject to confirmation by a member of the panel. The process of confirmation would
include an examination of the medical records. The panel member would be wholly
independent of the first doctor and would operate on a rota system, rather than, as now,
being selected by the treating doctor to carry out the task. A limited number of medical
coroners would be appointed and certain reportable categories of deaths would be
referred to them. Medical coroners would also deal with deaths where the treating doctor
and the second certifier were unable to agree about the cause of death. In other words,
the system would remain the same as at present to the extent that the coroner would be
dependent on others reporting deaths for investigation. However, death certification
would be a two-tier process in every case.
17.66 The proposal for the creation of a panel of doctors approved to act as second certifiers
was supported by the BMA and the DoH. Dr Pickersgill, representing the BMA, explained
that he envisaged the panel operating under the auspices of the medical coroner. Every
death would be reported to the medical coroner and members of the panel would carry
out an investigation on his/her behalf. The viewof the DoH was that there should never be
certification of death by a single doctor. The DoH suggested that the second certifying
doctor would speak to relatives, examine the forms completed as part of the certification
process and, where considered necessary, would carry out a full examination of the body
and consult the deceased’s medical records. The Department would like to see the panel
of second certifying doctors contracted to, and accredited by, the medical coroner.
Dr Cook, on behalf of the Faculty of Public Health Medicine, supported the proposal in
principle, but questioned the extent to which the panel would be perceived as
independent of the local health service. Other participants emphasised the need for the
second doctor to be of appropriate standing within the medical profession, so as to be
able to question the judgement of the treating doctor, should that become necessary. As I
have explained previously, Dr Grenville favoured retention of the existing system whereby
certain categories of deaths only (rather than all deaths) are reported to the coroner.
However, he observed that the two doctor system that he had described would work
equally well if all deaths were reportable and the panel of doctors operated under the
auspices of the medical coroner.
17.67 It will be appreciated that, if there were to be an examination and enquiry conducted by
a second doctor in every case, this would go considerably further than Mr Hennell’s
suggestion of a discussion between the medical coroner and the treating doctor and
would involve significantly greater medical resources. For the DoH, Mr Mann was
419
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
optimistic that the human resource implications were acceptable. Dr Baker, of the RCGP,
was less confident that the necessary manpower would be available.
17.68 Mr Hennell’s suggestion was supported by Professor Baker. He was concerned at the
retention of a category of deaths that could be certified by only one doctor. On the other
hand, he was worried that the medical coroner might be ‘swamped’ if s/he had the task of
investigating all deaths.
Comment
17.69 In my view, the proposal that a panel of doctors should provide a second tier of
certification is far from ideal. First, the system would depend on the doctors’ identification
of reportable deaths and the need for a published list. However, I accept that a panel
doctor could be trained to identify reportable deaths satisfactorily. Second, I consider that
it would be difficult to ensure that the panel doctor was truly independent of the first doctor.
The panel doctor would be a member of the same local professional community as the first
doctor. In rural areas particularly, there could be no true independence. Third, if the
second certification were to be carried out thoroughly and were to include consultation
with the deceased’s family, it would be very heavy on medical resources. The proposal
bears an uncomfortable resemblance to cremation certification. I have little confidence in
the assurances that the second certification would be thorough. As I recorded in Chapter
Three, the BMA used to give repeated assurances that the Form C procedure was
thorough and effective and I am quite sure it was neither.
17.70 The proposal that all deaths should be reported to the medical coroner, who would use a
panel of doctors for certification, would be more acceptable but I fear that the medical
resource implications would be immense if the panel doctor considered each death
thoroughly. I think that some other way must be found of handling deaths within the
coroner’s office.
Additional Safeguards
17.71 Professor Baker observed that one advantage of the process proposed by Mr Hennell was
that it would enable a medical coroner to undertake prospective checks on certain deaths.
This was in contrast to the Inquiry’s original suggestion that retrospective checks could be
made on the documentation relating to certain deaths. Such retrospective checks would
take place after disposal of the body so that, if suspicion were aroused, it would (at least
where the body had been cremated) be too late to conduct an autopsy or other
examination of the body. Professor Baker suggested that, if a medical coroner were
concerned at the pattern of deaths occurring at a care home, or among the patients of a
particular doctor, s/he could elect to investigate a death falling within that pattern at the
time it was reported. Then, there would still be the opportunity for all necessary
examinations to be carried out and matters would still be fresh in the minds of the available
witnesses.
17.72 Professor Baker supported general, as well as specifically targeted, checks. He believed
that it would be helpful to ensure that the general checks covered deaths occurring under
420
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the care of all general practitioners and clinical teams in hospital, and those occurring in
a variety of institutions such as hospitals and care homes. He estimated, for example, that
it might be feasible for the service to audit at least one death among the patients of every
general practitioner, every two to three years, and up to 10% of deaths occurring in each
institution. If a concern was identified, a greater number of deaths would be examined and
Professor Baker said that there would then be a useful part to be played by
retrospective audit.
Comment
17.73 I agree with Professor Baker’s views on the need for audit. I accept that, if all deaths are
reported to the medical coroner, prospective checks on a proportion of deaths would
provide a useful form of audit of whatever handling system were to be adopted. If, for
example, the medical coroner were to undertake a full investigation only into those cases
which would now be regarded as ‘reportable’ and the remaining straightforward cases
were to be certified by the medical coroner’s staff, some form of audit of those cases would
be required. Targeted checks into certain categories of deaths (e.g. deaths occurring in
a particular nursing home) would also be of value.
The Imposition of a Statutory Duty to Report to the Coroner
17.74 Under the current system, a registrar has a statutory duty, in certain defined
circumstances, to report to the coroner a death which falls within the definition of a
‘reportable’ death. A statutory duty also falls upon those responsible for certain types of
institution (e.g. prisons) in respect of the deaths of persons in their custody. In its
Discussion Paper, the Inquiry sought views about drawing up a list of other categories of
persons who would have a statutory duty to report a reportable death to the coroner. If a
system were adopted whereby all deaths were referred to the coroner, a duty might still
exist to report concerns about a death. It was suggested that it might be a criminal offence
knowingly to fail to report a reportable death and, for professionals, a disciplinary offence
negligently to fail to report.
Doctors andNurses in Hospital
17.75 Representing the RCP, Dr Evans said that, in the context of a death in hospital, doctors
should be under a statutory duty to report concerns if, for example, they had reason to
suspect that the death might have been caused by inappropriate treatment. He thought
the duty could reasonably be extended to a doctor who had not treated the patient
personally, but who was told about inappropriate treatment by another doctor. He
believed that the duty to report concerns should extend to nurses. The example was used
of a nurse who had concerns about the care a patient had received prior to death and who
was not reassured by the explanation given to him/her by the treating consultant. If the
consultant refused to take the nurse’s concerns further, Dr Evans believed that the nurse
should have a statutory duty to report those concerns to the coroner.
421
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Hospital Managers
17.76 Both Dr Evans and Professor Baker took the viewthat any statutory duty to report to the
coroner should be extended to hospital managers. Dr Baker, representing the RCGP,
made the point that the various professional codes of conduct for nurses, doctors and
other health professionals state that their primary duty is to protect patients. That means
that there is a professional duty to raise concerns about care. She also observed that there
were imminent plans to implement a professional code of conduct for NHS managers,
which would have the effect of bringing them into line with their professional colleagues.
Mrs Viney, representing Cruse, thought it appropriate to impose a duty on the manager of
a nursing or residential home in relation to the deaths of residents at their premises.
UnqualifiedHospital Staff
17.77 Dr Evans said that, if the duty were to be extended to non-qualified staff within a hospital,
it should be limited to reporting the event to a qualified member of staff. Professor
Baker agreed that a statutory duty to report to the coroner should not be extended to
non-qualified staff, except those in a management role. It was agreed that the most
important step, both inside and outside hospital, was to create easy and recognised
routes through which unqualified staff could channel any concerns that they might have.
Paramedics
17.78 Professor Keith Mackway-Jones, representing the Greater Manchester Ambulance
Service NHS Trust, suggested that any duty to report should attach to the ambulance
service, rather than to individual paramedics. The duty on an individual paramedic should
extend only to reporting any concerns to a superior or to ambulance control.
Doctors andStaff in General Practice
17.79 Dr Pickersgill, representing the BMA, did not see any difficulty in a member of a general
practice being placed under a statutory duty to report concerns, even though this might
result in him/her having to report concerns about the treatment provided by another
member of the practice. He did not think that it would be reasonable to impose a statutory
duty on the administrative and secretarial staff. Instead, he suggested that efforts should
be made to ensure that staff were aware of the routes via which they could raise concerns,
such as to another partner in a group practice or to the primary care trust. Dr William
Holmes, the Group Medical Director of Nestor Healthcare Group plc, a commercial
organisation which provides out of hours cover for general practitioners, thought that it
would be reasonable to impose a duty to report concerns about a death on deputising
doctors. The requirement to do so could be incorporated into the protocols produced by
his own company (and no doubt those of other organisations) for guidance when dealing
with unexpected deaths.
Members of the Public
17.80 A small number of respondents, including Cruse, supported the extension of the duty to
members of the public. At the seminars, Mrs Viney, representing Cruse, said that it would
422
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
be reasonable to impose such a duty. Indeed, she felt the creation of a duty might make
it easier for family members to report concerns. It would prevent them from having to make
what would otherwise be a difficult decision. However, a further response, received from
Cruse after the seminars, indicated a change of mind. Having learned that the imposition
of a statutory duty would involve the imposition of legal sanctions for non-compliance,
Cruse nowbelieves that the imposition of a duty on members of the public would not be
appropriate. Instead, a culture should be developed in which it is perceived as a citizen’s
duty to report a death about which s/he has concerns. The majority of respondents agreed
that members of the public should be encouraged to report deaths to the coroner, but felt
that the creation of a statutory duty would be neither desirable nor readily enforceable. The
DoH and others said that, if such a duty were to be created, a considerable amount of
public education would be required to make the system effective.
Funeral Directors, Embalmers andMortuary Technicians
17.81 The British Institute of Funeral Directors thought that funeral directors and embalmers
should have an obligation to report deaths to the coroner. The National Association of
Funeral Directors suggested that both funeral directors and mortuary technicians should
have a specific right to report any concerns to the coroner. Both regularly see bodies
stripped and are in an excellent position to observe any signs of violence or neglect. They
also have close contact with families.
Police Officers
17.82 Commander Andre Baker, representing ACPO, sawno problem in imposing a duty on
police officers but thought that a duty should not necessarily be imposed on all civilian
staff.
Comment
17.83 In my view, it would be reasonable to impose on a qualified or responsible person a duty
to report to the coroner a concern about a death that arose in the course of that person’s
professional duties. I include, in the categories of the qualified and responsible, doctors,
nurses, hospital managers, nursing and care home managers and owners, paramedics,
police officers, funeral directors, embalmers and mortuary technicians. I can see no
objection in principle to the suggestion that the duty should be imposed by statute and
should carry criminal sanctions. I think it would be in only a very rare case that the police
would prosecute. In any event, in my view, each professional body should impose an
ethical duty to report concerns about a death to the coroner.
17.84 I do not think it appropriate that unqualified staff should be under any such duty. For them,
there should be the opportunity to express their concerns, without fear of any form of
reprisal.
Certifying the Fact of Death andAscertaining the Circumstances of Death:
Form 1
17.85 There is currently no statutory requirement for certification of the fact of death and
procedures for diagnosing or confirming death vary from area to area. The fact of death
423
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
is often confirmed by a doctor. Increasingly, however, it is done by other professionals,
including paramedics and nurses. In most areas of England and Wales, funeral directors
will not move a body without death having been confirmed by a health professional. In
some areas, however, funeral directors will take a body from the scene of death to their
own premises without formal confirmation of the death having taken place. There is no
statutory requirement for any record to be made of the fact that death has been confirmed
or of the circumstances surrounding a death.
17.86 The Inquiry’s Discussion Paper suggested that, in every case, there should be formal
confirmation and certification of the fact of death. A form (Form 1) should be completed
by the person who confirms the fact of death. Form 1 would require personal details of the
deceased, together with details of the physical examination made in order to confirm the
death and accounts of the circumstances of the death and of the medical condition of the
deceased prior to death. A completed Form 1 would provide a snapshot of the information
available very shortly after the death or the discovery of the death. There was unanimous
agreement amongst the participants at the seminars that it was important to capture
factual information about the circumstances of death at the earliest possible opportunity
and to record it in a document such as Form 1.
Who ShouldBe Authorisedto Certify the Fact of a Death Occurring in the Community?
17.87 Some respondents to the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper had gained the mistaken impression
that the Inquiry was suggesting that every death should be confirmed by a doctor and that
other categories of health professional should be debarred from carrying out this function.
Not surprisingly, this misunderstanding produced considerable concern about the
potential burden that would be placed on doctors. In fact, the Inquiry was anxious to
explore whether the categories of professionals trained to diagnose death might be
extended, in order to relieve some of the pressure on doctors. Most respondents
accepted that health professionals other than doctors should be authorised to confirm that
death had occurred. However, in its written response to the Discussion Paper, Cruse
argued that, in order for the system to have public confidence, every death should be
confirmed by a doctor. At the seminars, Mrs Viney, Cruse’s Chief Executive, recognised
that such a requirement would present practical difficulties. In a further written response,
submitted after the seminars, Cruse accepted that other qualified medical professionals,
such as nurses and paramedics with relevant training, could properly be authorised to
carry out the task of confirming death.
Doctors
17.88 Under the current system, if a patient dies in the community during surgery hours, the
general practitioner or some other suitably qualified member of the practice team (such
as a partner or the practice nurse) will usually attend and confirm the fact of death. If the
person attending to confirm death is the deceased’s usual doctor, s/he will certify the
cause of death or, in an appropriate case, refer the death to the coroner.
17.89 Different procedures operate outside surgery hours. I have described these in Chapter
Four. Given the increasing tendency of general practitioners to delegate out of hours care
424
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
to deputising services, general practitioner co-operatives and the like, it is likely that a
doctor attending outside surgery hours will not be the deceased’s own doctor and
therefore will not be in a position to certify the cause (as opposed to the fact) of death. If
the death occurs at a nursing or residential home and is expected, the BMA advises that
there is little purpose to be served by the attendance of a doctor out of hours, unless there
is some genuine concern as to whether the patient is dead. The obligation of the duty
doctor or deputising service is merely to inform the deceased’s general practitioner of the
death early on the next working day. If a death occurs at the deceased’s home, there may
be distressed relatives who require the attention of a doctor. Mrs Viney observed that
many people want the reassurance of having the death confirmed by a health
professional. However, if the relatives are happy to arrange for funeral directors to remove
the body without the attendance of a doctor, the BMA advises that there is no need for the
duty doctor to attend.
17.90 Dr Holmes said that, in his experience, deputising doctors do generally attend to confirm
the fact of death, despite the absence of a statutory requirement or professional obligation
to do so. He stressed that this represents a considerable burden on the out of hours service.
Dr Holmes estimated that attendance to confirm death accounted for approximately 4% of
the home visits operated by his organisation and up to 10% of visitsmade after midnight. He
said thatthere were already problems in recruiting suitable doctorsto cover overnight shifts
and that any additional workload would increase the burden on the out of hours service
providers. He was concerned that the demands of gathering the information needed to
complete the Inquiry’s Form 1 would significantly increase the workload of the deputising
services. Dr Pickersgill raised the same point and said that the resources of general
practitioner co-operatives were already stretched. On an overnight shift,there might be one
or two doctors covering the patients of up to 100 doctors.
17.91 The Inquiry had asked for views on whether a doctor should be permitted to certify the fact
of death if s/he had a financial interest in the private hospital, clinic and/or care home in
which the deceased resided at the time of his/her death. In their written responses to the
Discussion Paper, the General Medical Council (GMC) and a number of other
respondents suggested that a doctor should be permitted to certify the fact of death in
those circumstances but that, as an additional safeguard, the death should then
automatically be referred to the medical coroner. Others, including the DoH, took the view
that no health professional with a financial interest should be able to certify the fact of
death. Others expressed a similar viewwith regard to the certification of the cause of
death. One respondent suggested that doctors should be required to declare such
financial interests and that a register of interests should be maintained by the medical
coroner.
17.92 The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health said in its written response to the
Discussion Paper that, whilst other categories of person may be able to diagnose death
in adults, only fully registered doctors should be permitted to certify the fact of death in
children.
Nurses
17.93 The RCN told the Inquiry that it is current practice for registered nurses to confirm death
in all NHS and independent sector settings, in accordance with locally established and
425
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
agreed protocols. It seems that different arrangements exist in different areas and
hospitals. No problem arises with a suitably qualified nurse confirming the fact of death in
a hospital setting. There was, however, some difference of opinion among respondents to
the Discussion Paper as to whether a nurse employed in a nursing or other care home
should be permitted to certify the fact that a resident in that home had died. Completion
of Form 1 would involve the gathering and recording of information about the
circumstances of the death and the deceased’s medical history. If the death had occurred
as a result of lack of care or some accident or ill-treatment in the home, there might be a
temptation for a nurse employed there to seek to cover up the true facts surrounding the
death, when completing Form 1.
17.94 Dr Pickersgill, representing the BMA, said that, in most areas of the country, agreements
had been reached between doctors’ practices and care homes as to who should confirm
the fact of death. In the case of an expected death, this is done by a member of the nursing
staff at the home concerned. Dr Holmes referred to the differences in the levels of
experience of nursing staff (particularly agency staff) employed in care homes. Some
were just not confident enough to confirm the fact of death. A number of participants at
the seminars recognised the possibility of a conflict of interest for a nurse employed at the
home. Professor Baker suggested that the solution to the potential conflict might be to
permit nurses to certify the fact of death only in cases where the death was expected and
the patient’s general practitioner had indicated in advance that s/he was happy for a nurse
to do so. He had experience of this being done in a nursing home or community hospital
setting. Other respondents to the Discussion Paper also took the viewthat nurses should
be permitted to certify the fact of death only where the death was truly ‘expected’.
17.95 Not all respondents agreed that nurses should be authorised to confirm the fact of death.
For example, the British Association in Forensic Medicine expressed the viewthat a nurse
should not be able to certify the fact of death under any circumstances, without referral to
a registered medical practitioner. The Nursing Midwifery Council (NMC) said that nurses
should be able to confirm the fact of death, as they do under the current system, but that
the decision whether or not to report the death to the medical coroner and the signing of
a ‘statement of professional opinion’, as envisaged on the Inquiry’s original Form 1, were
outside the current remit of nursing practice. The NMC thought that it might be possible
to extend the role of nurses with appropriate training and the use of agreed protocols, but
that this would require careful consideration. In their written response to the Coroners
Review, the Patients Association suggested that a solution might lie in limiting the function
of certifying the fact of death to certain categories of nurse who could be provided with
appropriate training.
Paramedics
17.96 In most parts of the country, paramedics are specifically trained to diagnose death, in
accordance with protocols created by individual ambulance trusts. Those protocols are
modelled on a protocol agreed by the Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison
Committee. The circumstances in which paramedics are permitted to diagnose death
vary from area to area. In general, they are restricted to cases in which an adult has
426
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
collapsed at least 15 minutes prior to the arrival of the paramedics, there has been no
attempt at cardiopulmonary resuscitation and death has not occurred in a public place.
17.97 Professor Mackway-Jones said that paramedics undoubtedly had the requisite skills to
certify the fact of death. However, in the case of an expected death, where there was no
prospect of resuscitation, it was an inappropriate use of resources for a paramedic to
attend. Professor Mackway-Jones was aware of instances of paramedics being called to
deaths in the community because no doctor was prepared to attend. The family, or staff
at a care home, had therefore turned to the ambulance service as the only agency
available to confirm the fact of death. Professor Mackway-Jones accepted that, in a case
where there was some prospect of resuscitation, attendance was clearly appropriate.
However, the creation of a system that ensured that paramedics attended those cases,
but not cases that simply involved confirming the fact of death, represented a real
challenge to the ambulance service.
17.98 In cases where paramedics attend, but are not authorised to diagnose death (e.g. where
the death occurs in a public place), they sometimes transport the body to the accident and
emergency department of a local hospital so that a doctor can confirm the fact of death.
Professor Mackway-Jones, who is the Medical Director of a busy accident and emergency
department, said that this practice does not present a major problem at his hospital. He
questioned whether paramedics should be permitted to certify the fact of death where that
death had occurred after failed attempts by them at resuscitation. He pointed out that the
situation gave rise to an obvious conflict of interests.
17.99 Professor Mackway-Jones said that, in principle, the ambulance service would be able to
provide the sort of information required by Form 1, although he did have some specific
observations about some of the questions contained on the version of the form which
appeared in the Discussion Paper. Paramedics already complete their own forms after
diagnosing death and Professor Mackway-Jones said that the completion of Form 1 would
not increase the period of time that the paramedic spent at the scene of a death.
Police
17.100 There was support among some participants for police officers to be permitted to certify
the fact of death in circumstances of obvious death, such as where the body has
decomposed or decapitation has occurred. However, Commander Baker, representing
ACPO, said at the seminars that he did not think that it was appropriate for police officers
to certify death even in those circumstances, because of the other responsibilities they
have at the scene. He was strongly opposed to officers certifying the fact of death in wider
circumstances. He foresawproblems training officers to perform the diagnosis. He also
recognised the potential for serious damage to public relations in the event that an officer
mistakenly diagnosed death in a living person. Commander Baker also made the point
that, although it is possible to certify the fact of death without any medical equipment,
police officers would not have available to them the type of equipment available to a
paramedic; therefore, the margin for error would be greater. Professor Mackway-Jones
made the point that individual police officers would be called upon to exercise their skills
in diagnosing death so infrequently that they would not develop the necessary confidence
in performing the task.
427
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Coroner’s Investigators
17.101 Mrs Aline Warner, on behalf of the Coroner’s Officers Association, suggested that
coroner’s investigators (who, in the Inquiry’s working model, would replace coroner’s
officers) should be authorised to certify the fact of death. This would reduce the number
of people having to attend the scene of the death and would thus limit the potential for
contamination. That would be an important factor if the death turned out to be suspicious
and the scene had to be subjected to forensic examination. The ability of a coroner’s
investigator to certify the fact of death would be particularly convenient in certain
circumstances. She cited the example of deaths caused by falling from cliffs in the area
where she operates. At present, the coastguard recovers the body and brings it to the top
of the cliff where the coroner’s officer is in attendance. Under the present arrangements,
it is then necessary to bring a paramedic, doctor or police officer to the scene to confirm
the fact of death. Obviously, if a coroner’s investigator were able to perform this task, that
would be far more convenient.
Comment
17.102 In my view, nurses, paramedics and coroner’s investigators should be authorised to
certify the fact of death, provided they have undergone a suitable training course. Doctors
should do so, of course; police officers should not. I do not think that a doctor or nurse
should be prevented from certifying the fact of death and completing Form 1 on account
of a financial interest in the institution in which the death occurs. Such a person may well
be the only suitably qualified person on duty at the time of the death. There would be little
point in calling another qualified person as, if the person with the financial interest wished
to lie about the circumstances of the death, s/he could give false information to the person
who was to complete Form 1.
Certifying the Fact of a Death Occurring in Hospital
17.103 When a death occurs in hospital, the problem of obtaining the services of a doctor or other
health professional to confirm the fact of death does not arise as it does when a death
occurs in the community. Death is confirmed by a doctor working in the hospital, or by a
nurse authorised to perform this task. Discussion at the seminars therefore centred on the
issue of who should complete Form 1 and whether the obligation to complete such a form
would place unreasonable demands on hospital staff.
17.104 In his written response to the Discussion Paper, Dr James suggested that the most
effective way of certifying the fact of death in hospitals would be to set up a designated
team with responsibility for certifying the fact of death in every case. He suggested that
this role could become part of the responsibilities of a nurse practitioner. Dr James saw
several advantages arising out of the scheme. The fact that fewer people were certifying
death more frequently would encourage consistency and high standards, and would
allow for audit. It was anticipated that a professional relationship would develop between
the team and the medical coroner’s staff, which would also facilitate the process.
Dr James proposed that, as part of the process of certifying the fact of death, members
of the team should consider a number of specific points that, if present, might indicate that
428
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
the death should be referred to the medical coroner. For example, he suggested that the
team should consider whether there were any issues that might implicate the hospital in
the death and whether the death fell outside the usual pattern of deaths.
17.105 Dr James suggested that the same arrangement would also work in hospices and larger
nursing homes. At the seminars, Dr Pickersgill observed that he did not believe it would
be possible for the arrangement to operate in community and cottage hospitals. He
thought that deaths in those institutions should be treated as deaths in the community,
rather than as deaths in hospital. There are around 400 community and cottage hospitals
in England and Wales. They account for about 10% (or 20,000) of NHS hospital beds.
17.106 Professor Mackway-Jones thought that special considerations applied to deaths that
occurred in hospital accident and emergency departments. He suggested that
responsibility for confirming the fact of death should remain with the clinical team who had
treated the patient but that the process of completing Form 1 could thereafter be carried
out by the team envisaged by Dr James or another member of staff. He gave the example
of a cardiac arrest, where death is confirmed at the point that a decision is taken to stop
attempts at resuscitation. It was important that certification of the fact of death was not
delayed so that the body had to remain for a long period in the department, where there
is frequently considerable pressure on space. Professor Mackway-Jones welcomed the
suggestion that someone from outside the department should attend at a later stage to
carry out any necessary investigations relating to the circumstances of the death.
17.107 Ms Pamela Dawson, who is currently the Bereavement Co-ordinator for the Borough of
Bromley as well as a former Chair of the National Association of Bereavement Services,
attended one of the seminars. She welcomed Dr James’ proposal in theory but thought
that, in certain hospitals, the scheme would be very difficult to implement. By way of
example, she said that the Bromley Hospital is split over three sites in three separate
boroughs. She said that each site would require a separate team available 24 hours a day.
On average, the hospital has 40 to 45 deaths a week and there would be obvious
advantages in releasing other hospital staff from the task of certifying the fact of death.
However, the resource implications were considerable. Ms Dawson did not think that it
would be possible for a member of the nursing staff to be available to certify the fact of
death whilst at the same time working on a ward because, each time that person had to
go and deal with a death, the ward would be left understaffed. For a one-site hospital, the
practical difficulties would not be as great.
17.108 On behalf of the RCP, Dr Evans welcomed the proposal and the standardisation that it
would bring to post-death procedures. He agreed that the fact that the service would have
to be available 24 hours a day would give rise to issues of manpower. Dr Evans and
Ms Dawson both thought that, as an alternative to a dedicated team, it might be possible
to have a member of staff who had been trained in the certification of the fact of death on
duty on each ward. That member of staff would be responsible for the filling out of Form 1
for any death that occurred on the ward. The ward would not then be left understaffed
when a death occurred. Training could be directed at a smaller number of staff members
and those members of staff would be involved in the process of certification of the fact of
death on a sufficiently regular basis to avoid becoming de-skilled.
429
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Comment
17.109 In my view, the idea of having a person or team available to certify the fact of death and
complete Form 1 is attractive. However, I think it would be feasible only in a large hospital.
I accept Professor Mackway-Jones’ point about deaths in accident and emergency
departments.
Establishing the Fact of Death
17.110 The Inquiry invited views on the essential constituents of the examination required to
confirm the fact of death. As a basis for discussion, it was suggested that, in order to certify
that death had occurred, the person completing Form 1 should have observed the
absence of heart sounds, carotid and femoral pulses, breathing and response to painful
stimulus, together with tracking in the fundi (i.e. changes in the appearance of the veins
at the back of the eye that occur after the blood ceases to circulate).
17.111 Respondents to the Discussion Paper broadly agreed with the constituents put forward by
the Inquiry, with the exception of tracking in the fundi. This was thought too specialist an
observation to be made by paramedics. The findings of the Feasibility Study
commissioned by the Inquiry into use of the newly designed forms confirmed that the
inclusion of a requirement to look for tracking in the fundi would present problems, even
to doctors. Some respondents suggested that there should be prescribed time periods
over which some of the observations (e.g. absence of breathing) should be made before
death was confirmed.
17.112 At the seminars, Dr Paul Aylin, Clinical Senior Lecturer in Epidemiology and Public Health
at Imperial College School of Medicine, Science and Technology, suggested that, in
certain cases (e.g. where there was a devastating and obviously fatal injury), it might be
appropriate to establish death by means other than the observations already referred to.
He suggested that space should be made available on Form 1 for the certifier to record
any alternative means by which the fact of death had been established.
17.113 Surprise was expressed at the seminars that no generally agreed protocol, setting out the
minimum observations which must be made before a diagnosis of death can be made,
appears to exist at present. Instead, different organisations work to different protocols. It
does not appear that medical practitioners work to any protocol, except in special
circumstances, such as the diagnosis of brain stem death. It would obviously be desirable
if an appropriate protocol could be developed for agreement and adoption by all those
concerned with the diagnosis of death.
Permission to Remove the Body
17.114 Initially, the Inquiry envisaged that the person completing Form 1 would be able, once
satisfied that the death was expected and there was no other reason for the medical
coroner to investigate, to give permission for the deceased’s body to be moved to the
premises of a funeral director. During the consultation process, some concern was
expressed about the prospect of paramedics and nurses taking responsibility for giving
that permission. At the seminars, a different system was canvassed whereby, having
430
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
completed Form 1, the person completing Form 1 would telephone the medical coroner’s
office and speak to the on-call investigator. Having heard the circumstances, the
investigator would then give permission to move the body to the premises of a funeral
director or would direct that it be moved to a mortuary.
17.115 Professor Baker and Dr Aylin supported the suggestion. Dr Baker, for the RCGP, and
Dr Pickering, representing the BMA, were concerned about the practical difficulties that
might arise. They foresawproblems with contacting the coroner’s office, or the member
of staff on call, particularly if a number of deaths were to occur during the same out of hours
period. Dr Pickersgill spoke of the difficulties which can be encountered at present in
reaching a coroner’s officer, even during working hours.
Comment
17.116 I do not think the difficulties outlined by Dr Baker and Dr Pickersgill will arise, provided that
the coroner’s office is properly resourced. During the day, there should be sufficient
officers to deal with all incoming calls. For deaths occurring out of hours, telephone calls
to the on-duty investigator will have to be redirected to a second and possibly a third
member of staff. Modern telephone technology can provide such a facility.
Responsibility for Coroners’ Investigations
The Current Role of the Coroner’s Officer
17.117 As I have explained in Chapter Eight, under the current system, the role performed by the
coroner’s officer varies from district to district. In some districts, coroner’s officers are
office-bound, answering the telephone and carrying out administrative duties. In others,
coroner’s officers (or coroner’s liaison officers, as they are sometimes called) are based
outside the office and spend much of their time visiting scenes of death, attending
autopsies, taking witness statements and liaising with the police. In some districts,
investigations are carried out on behalf of the coroner by serving police officers who have
been specifically assigned to coroner’s duties. Elsewhere, coroner’s investigations are
carried out by officers from the local police force, as part of their general policing duties.
17.118 Some coroner’s officers are civilians, often former police officers, who may be employed
by either the police force or the local authority. However, people from different
employment backgrounds, such as former nurses, paramedics and social workers, have
also been recruited in increasing numbers to fulfil the role of coroner’s officer.
The Future Role of the Coroner’s Investigator
17.119 The Inquiry’s Discussion Paper suggested that, under the working model, the medical and
judicial coroners would be supported by a team of trained civilian investigators. They
would replace the existing coroner’s officers and would be employed directly by the
coroner service. Views were invited as to the qualifications, experience and type of
training which would be appropriate for this new investigative post.
431
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Experience and Training
17.120 Many respondents supported the idea of multi-disciplinary teams of investigators.
Suggestions as to the type of employment backgrounds from which investigators might
be drawn included existing coroner’s officers, nurses, police officers, funeral directors,
staff from local authority cremation and cemeteries departments, hospital bereavement
officers, social workers, legal executives, mortuary technicians and personnel from the
armed services. Particular emphasis was placed on the benefit of investigators having
some medical knowledge. For example, in its written response to the Discussion Paper,
the Faculty of Public Health Medicine suggested that all investigators should be trained
at least to the level of a basic nursing degree, with some also having clinical experience.
17.121 A number of respondents suggested that the training should be complementary to the
skills already possessed by the individual concerned. For example, it was suggested that
a civilian would require greater training in investigative skills and forensic awareness in
gathering evidence from the scene than would a former police officer. On the other hand,
a former police officer would require training in the medical aspects of investigation. Some
core areas, such as the legal and ethical aspects of post-death procedures, would need
to be taught to all recruits.
17.122 Many respondents emphasised the fact that the investigators must have training in
dealing appropriately with the recently bereaved. However, Mrs Warner, of the Coroner’s
Officers Association, stressed the value of previous experience in related fields in
furnishing candidates with the skills and empathy necessary for speaking to bereaved
families. In its response to the Coroners ReviewConsultation Paper, the Association
suggested that a trainee coroner’s officer should have at least ten years’ ‘life experience’
in a profession such as medicine, law, social work, teaching or the emergency services
and, in addition, should undergo an entry examination.
Various Aspects of the Role of the Coroner’s Investigator
17.123 In its Discussion Paper, the Inquiry envisaged a system whereby at least one coroner’s
investigator in each district would be on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The
coroner’s office in which Mrs Warner works provides such a service. She was asked
whether any problems had been encountered in attracting staff prepared to work
antisocial hours. Mrs Warner replied that there had been an average of 90 applicants for
each of the last three jobs that had been advertised.
17.124 Mrs Warner described how, under the current system, coroner’s officers (certainly those
within her own district) take time to talk to bereaved relatives and to explain the post-death
procedures. She pointed out that, quite apart from the needs of the relatives, interaction
with the deceased’s family can form a valuable part of the investigative process.
Conversations with relatives can sometimes lead to information being volunteered that
would not otherwise be available. Mrs Warner therefore believed that contact with families
should continue to be made by those responsible for investigating the death, rather than
by another member of the coroner’s staff. Mrs Warner also observed that it is helpful for
families to deal with the same person within the coroner’s office throughout the whole
process. Mr Burgess agreed.
432
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
17.125 There was discussion at one of the seminars about bereavement support and who should
provide it. It had been suggested by some that the coroner service might be responsible
for providing the support that some families so badly need. Mrs Warner pointed out that,
at present, coroner’s officers sometimes find themselves ‘straying into the realms of’
counselling (or at least offering support to the bereaved), however much they try not to do
so. Both she and Mr Burgess, on behalf of the Coroners’ Society, expressed the viewthat
the coroner’s office should not provide in-house bereavement counselling and support
services, but should instead act as a facilitator, providing information about the availability
of such services elsewhere. For the DoH, Mrs Fry acknowledged that bereavement
services are not universally available, nor are they as effective as the Department would
wish. She indicated that the Department was looking to support development of the
services at present provided. However, the view is that these services should be located
within the NHS, rather than within the coroner service, with the latter advising those in need
of the services howand where they can be accessed.
17.126 At the seminars, Mrs Warner explained that the Coroner’s Officers Association envisaged
two distinct and separate roles for coroner’s officers in the future. One would be a forensic
investigative role. It was suggested that officers fulfilling that role would attend the scene
of a death, determine whether there was any reason for suspicion about the death and, if
so, arrange for the police to become involved. The second role would, Mrs Warner
suggested, be linked to the work of the medical coroner. Officers fulfilling that role would
take calls from general practitioners, liaise with families and inspect medical records.
Mrs Warner could see, however, the potential for a combination of the two roles, provided
that the individual concerned was willing to become involved in both types of work. For the
RCPath, Dr Peter Acland expressed concern at the prospect of division of the two roles in
the way suggested by the Coroner’s Officers Association. He considered the role of the
coroner’s officer to be investigative and believed that coroner’s investigators should be
out and about, conducting interviews and gathering information, rather than performing
duties of a purely administrative nature.
Comment
17.127 In my view, a trained corps of coroner’s investigators will be crucial to the operation of the
coroner service in future. They should come from varied backgrounds, although there will
be a particular need for some with nursing or paramedic experience. I think they should
have an investigative role and should liaise with bereaved relatives. I agree that they
should not have to carry out purely administrative functions, as many do at present.
The Interface between the Coroner Service andthe Police andOther
Investigative Agencies
17.128 Under the current system, the police investigate all deaths where there is a suspicion of
criminal involvement. Other types of death are subject to investigation by various bodies,
including the Health and Safety Executive. The permission of the coroner is required in
order for an autopsy to be carried out and, once the coroner is seized of a case, only s/he
has power to order release of the body for disposal.
433
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
17.129 It was suggested in the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper – and generally agreed by all – that
the police must continue to be responsible for the investigation of deaths where there is
any suspicion of criminal activity. The other responsible agencies too should retain their
responsibility to investigate in certain types of case. However, in the case of the death with
no suspicion of criminal involvement, trained investigators employed within the coroner
service would carry out a far greater degree of investigative work than is at present
undertaken by most civilian coroner’s officers. In the future, as now, it would be necessary
for the coroner service to co-operate with the other investigative agencies. The agency
with which the coroner service would be working most frequently would inevitably be the
police. The Discussion Paper therefore invited views about the interface between the
investigative work carried out by the police (together with the other relevant agencies) and
the coroner service, and about any potential conflicts that might arise.
The Role of the Coroner Service When There Is a Suspicion of Criminal
Involvement
17.130 Commander Baker, representing ACPO, was asked about the contribution that a coroner
under the current system is able to make to a police investigation. The Inquiry has heard
that it is not unusual for coroners to attend murder scenes, to go to meetings of senior
police officers who are investigating a case of homicide and (even when not medically
qualified) to attend autopsies. It was not clear to me, when I heard this evidence, whether
or not the involvement of the coroner was of any value in these cases. Commander Baker
had no experience of coroners attending at the scene of a death. However, he did not see
that a coroner could usefully contribute to the early part of a police investigation, save with
procedural matters such as giving the necessary direction that an autopsy should be
carried out. Dr Peter Acland, a forensic pathologist representing the RCPath, had
experience of the presence of a coroner at the scene of a death actually hindering the
police investigation. He said that the attendance of the coroner raised issues of
contamination of evidence, that sometimes the investigation had to be delayed until the
arrival of the coroner and, in certain cases in which he has been involved, the coroner has
made decisions which complicated the investigation. He said that he had never known an
investigation that had derived any benefit from the involvement of a coroner at an early
stage.
17.131 Mr Burgess, representing the Coroners’ Society, sawpotential problems with a coroner
being physically present at the scene of a death or at an autopsy. However, he supported
the principle that a coroner, or at least someone separate from the police, should have the
power to authorise examination and disposal of the body. He said that this provides a
degree of independence and detached oversight. Mr Burgess agreed that, in some
cases, the justification that has to be given by the police for examination of the body is a
very straightforward matter. However, he said that, when asked by the police to direct an
autopsy, he very often discusses with them who is the most appropriate pathologist and
whether or not it is right to wait for that pathologist to become available in a case where,
for example, the police are holding a suspect subject to custody time limits. Further issues
can arise in relation to the disposal of the body. Mr Burgess said that the coroner plays an
important role in cases where there is a conflict of interest between the police, who might
434
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
have an interest in retaining the body for as long as possible, and relatives, who usually
want the body released quickly. He said that, in an appropriate case, it is possible for a
coroner to apply pressure on the police by setting a limit as to when the body will be
released for disposal. Mr Burgess agreed that decisions about directing autopsies and
authorising disposal of a body could properly be performed by a medical coroner,
provided those decisions were subject to challenge, possibly to the judicial coroner.
17.132 Commander Baker did not foresee any difficulties in the police liaising with the medical
coroner in much the same way as the police liaise with the coroner under the current
system. Mrs Warner, representing the Coroner’s Officers Association, suggested that,
since (under the current system at least) most deaths initially considered suspicious were
likely to proceed to an inquest, liaison should not be with the medical coroner but with the
judicial coroner who would ultimately be responsible for conducting the inquest.
No Suspicion of Criminal Involvement
17.133 The current policy as to the attendance of police at the scene of a death where there is no
suspicion of criminal involvement varies from force to force. The police rarely attend the
scene of a death occurring in hospital. In relation to deaths occurring in the community,
the police are typically summoned by someone who has witnessed a sudden death or
discovered a body. The police are often summoned by the ambulance service. There is
often little that can be achieved by police attendance and it is widely thought that this
represents an inappropriate use of police resources. Indeed, the police will often not
attend the scene of a death if, in the period between the death being reported and the
attendance of an officer at the scene, a doctor is identified who is able to certify the cause
of death. Similarly, if an officer has actually reached the scene, in the absence of any
obvious grounds for suspicion, s/he will leave once such a doctor has been identified.
17.134 Commander Baker said that, if the current practice of police officers routinely attending at
deaths where there is no suggestion of criminal involvement were stopped, that could
save police resources. In order for this to be achieved, the public would need to be
educated to contact the coroner’s office, rather than the police, in the event of a death.
However, Commander Baker went on to say that, if a coroner’s investigator attended at
the scene and identified any suspicion of criminal involvement (e.g. evidence of suicide
or death due to recreational drug taking), the scene must be ‘frozen’ and the police
contacted immediately to take over the investigation. If, having attended, the police find no
evidence of criminal involvement, the investigation could be handed back to the coroner’s
office unless and until there was any further suspicion of criminal involvement.
Commander Baker thought that coroner’s investigators could be trained to recognise
when it was necessary to involve the police. Mrs Warner, for the Coroner’s Officers
Association, added that, to some extent, this happens already. In districts where coroner’s
officers attend scenes of death, they will assess whether or not the police should be
involved.
17.135 Commander Baker agreed that the categories of cases that required police involvement
could be set out in protocols. Those protocols could be refined and added to over time.
Mrs Warner referred to a recent document, ‘Report on the Provision of Coroners’ Officers’,
435
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
published in August 2002, to which I have referred in Chapter Eight. The document sets
out appropriate standard operating procedures (or service level agreements) to manage
the interface between coroner’s officers and the police. This type of exercise would be
necessary in any newsystem. Provision should also be made for liaison with the Health
and Safety Executive and other investigative agencies, to avoid duplication of
investigation or potential conflict.
17.136 In its written response to the Discussion Paper, the RCGP had expressed concern about
possible conflicts that might arise between the police and the medical coroner. However,
having heard the discussion at the seminars, the College’s representative, Dr Baker, felt
that any potential conflict would be capable of resolution by agreement.
The Provision of Mutual Assistance between the Police andthe Coroner’s Investigator
17.137 In cases that did not require investigation by the police, Commander Baker said that it
would be possible for the police to offer assistance to coroner’s investigators in a number
of different ways. For example, police officers could assist coroner’s investigators by
exercising any powers that the coroner might be given to enter and search premises. The
police could also take steps to prevent anyone from obstructing the investigators in their
work and could assist in securing premises and in tracing next of kin.
17.138 Likewise, in relation to cases that are investigated by the police, it was said that coroner’s
officers are currently in a better position (certainly once an inquest has been ordered) to
obtain medical records (particularly hospital records) than are the police. In future,
coroner’s investigators could continue to obtain records on behalf of the police.
Mrs Warner said that, under the current system, there were a number of other ways in
which some coroner’s officers were able to offer support to the police: for example, in
providing information about the capacity and workload of mortuaries in the area and about
local and national toxicology services. They also act as a liaison for, and attend at,
autopsies, where they can brief the pathologist about the circumstances of the death.
Although the police have direct access to forensic services, Commander Baker said that
they sometimes requested toxicological testing through the coroner in order to obtain the
results more quickly.
Investigations on Behalf of the Coroner
Investigations at the Scene of Death
17.139 Under its working model, the Inquiry suggested that, in most cases to be investigated by
the medical coroner (except where the death was being investigated by another agency,
such as the police or the Health and Safety Executive), the coroner’s investigator would
attend the scene of the death. The investigator would record his/her observations of the
scene and gather all available evidence, including as much information as possible from
those with knowledge of the circumstance of the death. The investigation would be carried
out in accordance with a protocol. Possible constituents of such a protocol were set out
in the Discussion Paper and comments invited.
436
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
17.140 There was widespread support for the idea of developing a protocol, governing the way
in which any investigation at the scene of a death should be carried out. Respondents to
the Discussion Paper made helpful suggestions as to the possible content of such a
protocol. At the seminars, it was suggested that minimum standards could be established;
these could then be reviewed and added to over time. Commander Baker stressed the
importance, from a police perspective, of having pictorial evidence of the scene, in the
form of either a still photograph or a video. That would be valuable in the event of a criminal
investigation becoming necessary in the future. Professor Baker agreed that the taking of
photographs would provide a valuable record of the scene and made the point that the
taking and storing of photographs would be much simpler with the advent of digital
photography.
17.141 There was discussion at the seminars about whether it would be practical and desirable
for a coroner’s investigator to take a sample of blood from the deceased at the scene. It
was suggested that this might be done for the purpose of random toxicological testing in
a case that was not to be subjected to a full coroner’s investigation. This is done, for
example, in Maryland, USA, where toxicological testing is an important feature of the
death investigation system. Dr Acland, on behalf of the RCPath, thought that, with proper
training and in appropriate circumstances, it would be possible for a sample to be taken
without problem. Dr Leadbeatter and a number of other pathologists expressed a contrary
view. They felt that there would be real practical difficulties (such as inadequate lighting,
lack of proper facilities and difficulty in finding an appropriate vein) in a large number of
cases. In reply, Dr Acland said that, although there can be technical difficulties, these
could be overcome with training. He pointed to the fact that, in cases where no crime is
suspected, samples are often taken by mortuary technicians, rather than pathologists. He
did, however, accept that there might be aesthetic problems, such as the spilling of blood
at the scene, and an associated risk of disease. He said that the category of case where
a sample could be taken by a coroner’s investigator at the scene of death would
necessarily be limited. Mrs Warner’s viewwas that, although some coroner’s officers
might object to taking blood samples, the majority would not and, with adequate training,
she did not see why it could not be done.
17.142 At the seminars, Professor Helen Whitwell, Professor of Forensic Medicine and Head of
Department at the University of Sheffield, said that a full examination of the death scene
was one of a number of investigative tools that the medical coroner could use to ascertain
the cause of death. Other such investigative tools might include a thorough external
examination of the body, examination of the medical records and toxicological testing.
When conducted, they could provide sufficient evidence to avoid the necessity for an
autopsy in certain cases.
17.143 In its written response to the Discussion Paper, the Coroner’s Officers Association
suggested that a coroner’s investigator should attend the scene of a death only if there
was likely to be an inquest into the death. That means that a judgement must be made at
a very early stage as to whether an inquest is going to be required. In practice, this
judgement is usually made by the police, who will inform the coroner’s office about any
‘inquestable death’. At the seminars, Mrs Warner said that attendance only when an
inquest was expected was the practice in her district and that, although there would be
437
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
advantages in a coroner’s investigator attending the scene of every death reported to the
coroner service, the resource implications of attending at the scene of all those deaths
would be enormous. If the resources could be made available, she said that attendance
would have considerable benefits, especially for the deceased’s family. The investigator
would be able to inform the family about the post-death procedures and could give the
information that the family needed at the time they needed it. The family would have seen
a ‘friendly face’ to whom they could relate during their later dealings with the coroner’s
office. These advantages would be in addition to the opportunity afforded to the
investigator of obtaining information to assist in the coroner’s investigation.
17.144 Mr Burgess agreed that, ideally, every death scene should be visited but doubted that
resources would allow for that. If they did not, a decision as to whether or not to attend
would have to be made on a case by case basis, dependent upon the pressures placed
on the coroner’s office at any particular time. He estimated that, at present, his officers
attend at the scene of approximately half the reported deaths that occur at home. Many
of those deaths do not go to inquest.
Comment
17.145 In my view, there will be many deaths at which there is no need for the coroner’s
investigator to attend. I have in mind that an investigator will speak to someone at the
scene in every case, usually by telephone, and will make a decision, on a case by case
basis, as to whether or not there is any need to attend in person. This might arise if it
appears advisable to inspect the scene of the death or if no one else is available to confirm
the fact of death. Such a visit would, as Mrs Warner observed, provide an opportunity to
make contact with a relative of the deceased.
Obtaining Information from Relatives andOthers with Knowledge of the Circumstances of
the Death
17.146 In the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper, it was suggested that a near relative of the deceased,
or another person who had been close to the deceased, should complete a form (Form 3),
setting out information about the circumstances of the death and the deceased’s state of
health before death and confirming that s/he did not have any concerns about the death.
This form would be submitted to the medical coroner, together with forms certifying the
fact (Form 1) and cause (Form 2) of death. It was envisaged that the person completing
Form 3 would have seen the completed Forms 1 and 2 and would confirm that their
contents were true. The object was to involve relatives in the information-gathering
process and to give them an opportunity to express any concerns that they might have
about the death. In addition, completion of a form such as Form 3 would prevent the
situation whereby the doctor certifying the cause of death could give false information to
the authorities in the knowledge that it would never be checked with those who knew the
truth. That was a situation that occurred time and time again with deaths certified by
Shipman.
17.147 If a relative were to be required to complete a form, it was clear that someone would have
to give him/her the form and provide any necessary assistance in completing it. The
438
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
question was who that ‘someone’ should be. It seemed to the Inquiry (and a number of
respondents agreed) inappropriate that the certifying doctor should have any part in
administering the form. Concern was expressed about the possibility that a doctor who
was trying to conceal a negligent or criminal act might be able to influence relatives and
convince them that their recollection of events was either incorrect or, in any event,
compatible with a death due to natural causes.
17.148 It was suggested in the Discussion Paper that the funeral director might assist relatives in
completing the form. However, respondents raised a number of potential problems with
that arrangement. There was concern about the ability of the family member and funeral
director to understand the medical information and terminology contained in the forms that
had been completed by the doctor. In addition, it was suggested that funeral directors
might put pressure on the family not to report concerns about a death, in order to avoid
delay. It was also recognised that, in assisting the family in verifying the information
provided by the doctor, funeral directors would be privy to the deceased’s medical
history, which would raise issues of confidentiality. There was concern that the funeral
director would not be in a position to give informed advice. Doubts were also expressed
about the willingness of families to commit any concerns that they might have to paper in
an ‘official’ document. By the time of the seminars, the Inquiry had moved away from the
idea of a form being presented to relatives by the funeral director and was canvassing
other ideas for securing the involvement of the family.
17.149 At the seminars, it was suggested that a member of the medical coroner’s investigative
team should discuss the death with a family member, take him/her through Forms 1 and
2 and ask whether s/he had any concerns about the death. The idea received broad
support, although there was doubt as to whether or not it would be practicable for every
interviewto take place in person. The possibility of a telephone interviewwas discussed.
A number of participants felt strongly that the interviewshould be conducted in person,
not least because several members of the family might wish to participate. Dr Pickersgill,
on behalf of the BMA, supported the idea of a face to face interviewin principle but pointed
out the logistical difficulties in holding such an interviewin every case, particularly in rural
areas where there were large distances to cover. In response, Dr Aylin made the point
that, under the current system, every death is registered in person, which requires the
attendance of the informant at the register office. It was suggested that, in some cases, it
would be appropriate for the interview to be held over the telephone. A question was
raised about the amount of time the family would have to consider the information
contained in the forms before giving their response. In practice, it seems likely that there
would be greater flexibility in the timing if the contact with the coroner’s office were to be
by telephone or face to face interview than would be the case if the family were required
to complete a form.
17.150 Another idea advanced at the seminars was that the interview with the family might be
conducted by the second doctor if, as suggested by some, there were to be a system that
involved certification by a second doctor in every case.
Comment
17.151 It seems clear to me that it will not be practicable or appropriate to ask relatives of the
deceased to complete Form 3. Consultation with the family will have to be effected in some
439
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
other way. Ideally this should take place face to face but I can see that that might give rise
to practical problems. It seems to me that the most appropriate person to consult with a
family member would be a coroner’s investigator.
Certifying the Cause of Death
17.152 Under the Inquiry’s working model, it was envisaged that a doctor involved in the
deceased’s care would in every case complete a form (Form 2), either certifying the cause
of death or, if the doctor took the viewthat s/he was unable to certify the cause of death,
referring the death to the medical coroner and including on the form as much information
as possible to assist in ascertaining the cause of death. The closest equivalent to Form 2
under the present system is the MCCD, which states the cause(s) of death, but contains
minimal information about the surrounding circumstances. Currently, doctors report
deaths to the coroner by telephone and, frequently, the reporting doctor provides no
written information for the coroner’s use. When the death occurs in the community, it is rare
for the coroner’s staff to obtain or examine the medical records.
17.153 There was almost unanimous agreement among respondents with the Inquiry’s
suggestion that the same certification procedures should apply to all deaths, regardless
of whether the death is to be followed by burial or cremation.
Qualification to Certify the Cause of Death
Recent Contact with the Deceased
17.154 The existing statutory framework requires the doctor who attended a deceased during
his/her last illness to issue an MCCD. The doctor might decide, however, that s/he cannot
properly certify the cause of death, either because of uncertainty as to the cause, or
because there is some other circumstance that makes the death reportable. One such
circumstance will arise where the doctor has not seen the deceased either within 14 days
before the death or after death (the ‘either/or rule’). In Chapter Two, I explained the origin
of the ‘either/or rule’ and its unsatisfactory effect. In the Discussion Paper, the Inquiry
raised the question of whether, in any new system, there should be a requirement that a
doctor must have seen the patient within a specified time before death in order to be able
to certify the death.
17.155 There was a divergence of views on this issue. A number of respondents favoured a
requirement that the certifying doctor should have seen the deceased after death and
within 14 days before death. The BMA, however, was opposed to retaining any such
restrictions. In its written response, the Association argued that: ‘There are no logical
grounds for requiring the certifying doctor (or a partner) to have had a consultation
with the deceased within a specified period prior to the death’. It stressed that
knowledge of the patient and access to the medical records were the most important
criteria. At the seminars, Dr Pickersgill, representing the BMA, said that, under the present
system, if a patient of one member of a group practice dies while that member is away on
holiday, a colleague at the practice will examine the medical notes to see if s/he is able
to certify the cause of death. He said that, provided there is a well-documented history of
440
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
disease, which tallies with eye witness accounts of the death, the colleague will be able to
give a cause of death. He or she will then contact the coroner’s officer who, ‘almost without
exception’, will give the colleague permission to certify. He pointed out that, even when a
patient is terminally ill, a doctor who has been away on holiday might not have seen
him/her within the fortnight before death and might therefore have to consult the coroner’s
officer before certifying.
17.156 Professor Baker disagreed with the stance taken by the BMA on the lack of need for there
to have been a consultation within a specified period. He said that, if the only deaths to
be certified were those which were truly ‘expected’, there should be a requirement for the
certifying doctor to have had a consultation with the deceased within the 14 days before
death. It should also be a requirement that the consultation was in connection with the
condition that caused death. Where a death was believed to be imminent, he would
expect the patient to be under fairly close medical supervision and to be visited regularly.
He said that, if the condition said to have caused death had not formed part of the subject
matter of the most recent consultation, that would suggest that the death had not been
imminent at the time of the consultation. Professor Baker went on to observe that, if a death
were expected and the usual doctor was going on holiday, he would expect responsibility
for care of the patient to have been formally handed over to another member of the
practice during the doctor’s absence.
17.157 Dr Grenville supported the stance taken by the BMA. He pointed out that there is nowa
team approach to primary care, particularly in larger practices, so that the care of patients
with chronic illness is a team responsibility. He gave the example of a patient with terminal
cancer who might receive daily care from district and Macmillan nurses but less frequent
visits from a general practitioner, particularly if the general practitioner the patient saw
most regularly was away on holiday. Dr Grenville said that, in future, he would like to see
the procedures simplified, so that a member of the team could certify the cause of death,
based on the team’s knowledge of the patient and the records kept by members of the
team. He pointed out that it is not always the doctor (as opposed to other members of the
team) who knows most about the patient. He would not welcome any change that made
the certification process more difficult.
17.158 Dr Grenville expressed the view that the imposition of an arbitrary period within which the
certifying doctor must have seen the patient may not be the right way to proceed. If a
period were to be specified, it should be longer than 14 days. On behalf of the Faculty of
Public Health Medicine, Dr Cook suggested that a limit of as much as six months would
be appropriate for a patient known to be suffering from a chronic illness.
17.159 Dr James was opposed to the imposition of a specified period within which the certifying
doctor must have seen the patient. He suggested that the focus should instead be on the
underlying disease process, He favoured a system whereby a doctor was not excluded
from completing Form 2 on the basis of the time which had elapsed since s/he last saw
the deceased. Instead, the doctor should record on the form all the information relevant
to the death (including the cause of death if s/he were able to give it) and the form should
then be passed to someone independent who would speak to the family, review the
contents of the form and make a final judgement as to whether there was sufficient
441
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
evidence to certify the cause of death. Dr Grenville supported this view. He observed that
the independent person could be either a medical coroner or a member of a panel of
second doctors, working on a sessional basis, as previously described. He observed that
the imposition of an arbitrary time limit could preclude a doctor from giving a worthwhile
opinion about cause of death. Such an opinion might, for example, be based on eye
witness accounts of the death or contemporary diagnostic investigations. In its written
response to the Discussion Paper, the GMC said that ‘inflexible requirements’ about the
circumstances in which doctors may or may not certify the cause of death would not be
helpful. The Council’s view was that what was important was that the doctor’s knowledge
of and involvement in the care of the patient was clearly detailed on the form that s/he was
required to complete.
17.160 In its written response to the Discussion Paper, the RCP said that there should be different
time limits for deaths in hospital and deaths in the community. It was suggested that, in
hospital, the certifying doctor should have had a consultation with the patient within 48
hours before death. At the seminars, Dr Evans, representing the RCP, suggested that an
appropriate period would be three, not two, days. He also said that the team approach
described by Dr Grenville should apply in hospital because the doctor with whom the
deceased had had the relevant consultation might not always be available to certify the
cause of death.
Comment
17.161 I accept the views of those who suggest that there should not be an arbitrary time limit as
a qualification for completing the proposed Form 2. What is important is not when the
doctor last sawthe patient but the quality of the doctor’s knowledge about the patient. As
the newsystem will not permit certification of the cause of death by a single doctor, there
will be some check on the quality of the doctor’s knowledge, either by a second doctor or
by the medical coroner or a member of his/her staff. When the doctor last sawthe patient
will be only one aspect of that knowledge.
Period of Registration
17.162 The Inquiry’s Discussion Paper invited views on the medical qualifications and experience
that a doctor should have in order to qualify him/her to certify the cause of death. In
particular, consultees were asked to consider whether the certifying doctor should have
to be fully registered. Under the current system, all registered doctors – including first year
hospital trainees with provisional registration – can complete an MCCD. The Inquiry has
heard evidence of problems associated with junior doctors in hospitals certifying the
cause of death, particularly just after the newintake of junior doctors take up their posts
twice a year. Dr Evans said that, in hospital, the certification of the cause of death is, for
the most part, left to junior doctors who are frequently left to carry out the task without any
discussion with, or advice from, their seniors. Dr James agreed and expressed the view
that the reason for this was that more senior doctors were not sufficiently interested to do
it themselves. He said that what was required for good quality death certification was
interest, familiarity with the task, training and accreditation. Attempting to create a system
442
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
whereby every doctor was fully capable of certifying the cause of death would, he
suggested, involve a considerable amount of training and supervision, if indeed it were
possible.
17.163 It was the view of the RCP, and the majority of consultees, that only doctors who have
completed a year of post-qualification training, and have thus achieved the status of being
fully registered, should be able to certify the cause of death. Dr Pickersgill, on behalf of
the BMA, together with a number of other respondents, suggested a period of five years’
post-registration experience, although Dr Pickersgill said it was not something about
which the BMA felt strongly. The Tameside Families Support Group suggested that the
appropriate period of experience should be seven years.
17.164 Professor Baker took the viewthat the certifying doctor should be fully registered but
stressed that training in certification was more important than length of experience or
qualification. There would be little benefit in delaying the time when a doctor was permitted
to certify unless there was suitable training. On behalf of the ONS, Dr Cleone Rooney
agreed that there was a need for training and assessment of competence in completion
of death certification documentation if it were to be done properly. She said that
consultants in a hospital should be responsible for supervising their junior staff. Research,
to which I referred in Chapter Five, had shown that consultants were, if anything, rather
less proficient in death certification than their junior colleagues. If they were required to
exercise supervision over more junior doctors, Dr Rooney suggested that they might
improve their own skills.
Comment
17.165 In my view, the completion of Form 2 is an important responsibility that should not be left
to very junior doctors. The proposed Form 2 will require the doctor to provide a summary
of the medical history and the chain of events leading to death. In my view, any general
practitioner principal should be qualified to complete Form 2. Such doctors are usually at
least four years post-qualification. A similar seniority would be appropriate for hospital
doctors. This would result in the form being completed by a doctor with some seniority in
the clinical team.
What Standard of Confidence Should Be Required to Certify the Cause of Death?
17.166 Under existing procedures, a doctor completing an MCCD certifies that the particulars set
out on the certificate, and the cause of death, are correct to the best of his/her knowledge
and belief. In its Discussion Paper, the Inquiry proposed that a doctor certifying the cause
of death on Form 2 should state:
‘I am satisfied that I am able to justify the diagnosis of the cause of death
... on the basis of the deceased’s medical history and the circumstances
of death.’
17.167 There was general support for this form of words, both in the written responses to the
Discussion Paper and at the seminars. It was suggested by the DoH, the RCP and a few
others that the appropriate standard of confidence should be the balance of probabilities.
443
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Whilst approving the Inquiry’s suggested wording, Professor Baker drew a distinction
between the decision as to whether or not the death should be referred to the coroner for
investigation (about which, he suggested, the certifying doctor should be ‘absolutely
certain’) and the decision as to which clinical condition was the direct cause of death.
Comment
17.168 I am pleased that the form of words proposed in the Discussion Paper received so much
support, as I regard it as appropriate.
OldAge
17.169 Under the current system, it is open to a doctor to certify the cause of death just as ‘old
age’. The guidance provided to doctors completing an MCCD states that ‘old age’ should
not be used as the only cause of death, unless a more specific cause of death cannot be
given and the deceased was aged 70 or over. On behalf of the ONS, Dr Rooney said that,
at the time of its introduction as an acceptable cause of death in 1985, it was intended that
‘old age’ should be used in the case of a frail, elderly person who gradually declined, was
at home, being seen by his/her general practitioner, had no particular disease but just
came to the end of his/her lifespan. However, following its introduction, the use of ‘old age’
increased and extended to deaths occurring in circumstances other than those for which
it was intended. It began to be used where the death occurred in hospital, as well as in the
community. Dr Rooney suggested that this was odd, since it was unlikely that a patient
would get a bed in an NHS hospital if s/he had no identifiable disease. However, she
reported that, in the recent past, the use of ‘old age’ as a cause of death had declined.
Dr Rooney agreed with the suggestion that, if a system whereby doctors certified the
cause of death were retained, it should not be open to a doctor to give ‘old age’ as the
cause of death. Instead, where there was no specific diagnosis, the patient was
sufficiently old and further medical investigations were deemed inappropriate, it should
be open to a medical coroner to certify the cause of death as ‘old age’. However, she
added that there should be a positive element to the diagnosis, i.e. there should have been
a very slowgeneral decline preceding death. There was a significant amount of support
for this view. In a written response to the Discussion Paper, the Death Certification
Advisory Group of the ONS suggested that, rather than defining ‘old age’ by reference to
arbitrary age limits, it might be better to define explicitly the circumstances in which it
would be appropriate to use ‘old age’ as a cause of death.
17.170 Professor Baker said that, in his view, ‘old age’ was acceptable where it was put forward
as a positive diagnosis. However, if it was merely put forward in the absence of any other
diagnosis, because the deceased was elderly and to avoid the need for any further
investigations, he did not regard that as appropriate. He pointed out that, in the case of
many elderly people, there are other conditions present that might at least be part of the
picture. He did not think that a ‘guess’ at ‘old age’ was acceptable.
17.171 The viewwas expressed by some participants that ‘old age’ should continue to be an
acceptable cause of death as at present, but that the minimum age limit should be
significantly increased, for example to 85 or 90.
444
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
17.172 The suggestion that certification of the cause of death as ‘old age’ might be an automatic
trigger for referral of a death to the medical coroner was supported by the BMA and the
RCP, among others. However, the RCGP was concerned that, if ‘old age’ were not
available to doctors as a cause of death, the number of autopsies might be increased.
Concerns were also expressed that, in order to spare families the ordeal of an autopsy,
doctors might cite other conditions as the cause of death. Those conditions might be no
more specific than ‘old age’ (e.g. the use of ‘bronchopneumonia’ in a case where there is
no convincing history or supporting histology) and might have the effect of rendering
mortality statistics less accurate.
17.173 Some participants thought that, even with the additional safeguard of a referral to the
medical coroner, the continued use of ‘old age’ would be unacceptable. This was the view
expressed by the DoH in its written response to the Discussion Paper. However, at the
seminars, Mr John Mann said that the Department recognised that, in the very elderly, it
may be difficult to identify a cause of death other than ‘old age’, so that some flexibility
might be required. Patient Concern, Age Concern and the Tameside Families Support
Group were among the respondents who expressed the view that ‘old age’ should not be
acceptable as a cause of death.
Comment
17.174 In my view, ‘old age’ should be an acceptable cause of death but only when it amounts to
a positive diagnosis, as suggested by Professor Baker. If it were not acceptable, there
might be an unwarranted increase in autopsies. I agree that 70 seems too low an age limit
nowadays; 80 would be more suitable. I am attracted to the suggestion that only the
medical coroner should be able to certify a death as due to ‘old age’.
External Examination of the Deceased’s Body
The Current Position
17.175 Under the existing system, there is no requirement for the doctor who issues the MCCD to
see the deceased after death. Death may or may not have been confirmed by a doctor,
paramedic or nurse. If it has, any examination conducted is likely to have been directed
at ascertaining whether there are any signs of life, rather than checking for any marks
suggestive of violence or neglect. When the deceased is buried, no second certificate is
required, so that it is perfectly possible for the burial to take place without any examination
of the body at all having taken place after death. If the deceased is cremated, the Forms
B and C doctors should have seen and examined the body but the evidence given to the
Inquiry suggests that such examinations are frequently very cursory, involving sight of the
deceased’s face and identity tag only. The likelihood is that the body will be buried or
cremated, without any formal check having been made for marks of violence or neglect.
17.176 The Inquiry’s Discussion Paper sought views about the value and practicability of an
external examination of the body by the person completing Form 1 or by the Form 2 doctor.
The object of such an examination would be to look for any marks suggestive of violence or
neglect. The Inquiry also suggested that funeral directors might be required to complete a
445
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
form (Form 4), stating that they had carried out a visual examination of the deceased’s
body, recording any marks or injuries observed and stating whether they had any reason
for suspicion about the death. Funeral directors are, of course, in a good position to
observe any suspicious marks, since it is usual for them to see the naked body in the
course of preparing the deceased for burial or cremation.
Examination at the Time When the Fact of Death Is Certified
17.177 It was suggested in the Inquiry’s Discussion Paper that the person certifying the fact of
death should examine the body and record on Form 1 any injection marks, sutured
wounds, bruising, abrasions, petechiae, lacerations or other injuries. It was not
contemplated that, when a death occurred in the community (especially at the deceased’s
home with family members present), it would be appropriate for the body to be stripped
and subjected to a full examination. However, the Inquiry envisaged that a more limited
examination might be carried out. In hospital, there would be no practical problems, as
mortuary facilities would be readily available.
17.178 Many respondents expressed concern at the suggestion that there should be a full
examination of the body at the time when the fact of death was confirmed. At the seminars
Dr Maureen Baker, representing the RCGP, referred to practical difficulties, such as
inadequate lighting and the possibility of infection, which might be encountered when
carrying out an examination at a deceased’s home. She emphasised the distress that
might be caused to relatives by the conduct of a full examination and observed that some
ethnic minority groups may require examination by a person of the same gender as the
deceased. She said that the RCGP would support a limited examination at the scene of
the death, with the proviso that the College’s view was that a ‘more comprehensive’
examination of the body should take place at a later stage. In its written response to the
Discussion Paper, the RCGP had said that there should be an examination of the whole
body to exclude signs of violence, unless the certifier was present at death or death was
due to a long-standing illness and the certifier did not suspect foul play. As to the extent
of the ‘limited examination’, Dr Baker suggested that it should be confined to the head and
neck. Such an examination would not be intrusive and, indeed, might be conducted
without relatives being aware that the doctor was looking for possible signs of violence or
neglect. For the RCP, Dr Evans pointed out that, in the context of the Shipman case, the
examination should extend to the forearms, so that any signs of a recent injection could
be noted. However, he expressed reservations about the requirement to record the
suggested marks, particularly in respect of a patient dying in hospital. He pointed out that
bruising of the arms is common among the elderly and those taking certain medication,
while most patients dying in hospital will have skin puncture marks resulting from recent
injections or the taking of blood samples. The BMA was also concerned about the
practical difficulties of a full external examination and about the possible medico-legal
implications for a doctor who failed to notice signs of violence and neglect that were
subsequently discovered to be present.
17.179 Commander Baker suggested that, in practice, it might be possible to carry out an
examination at the scene in a larger number of cases than was expected, so long as an
explanation was given to relatives. He was concerned, however, that, if the death were to
446
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
be followed by a criminal trial, a response on Form 1 to the effect that there were no
suspicious signs (when, in fact, there had been no opportunity to carry out a proper
examination) might undermine any medical evidence subsequently obtained. He
suggested that the extent of any examination carried out should be recorded on Form 1
and, if it had not been possible to carry out an examination, the form should reflect this.
Comment
17.180 In my view, for deaths in the community, there should be a limited examination when the
fact of death is certified. For hospital deaths, the whole body should be examined at this
stage.
Examination at the Point of Certifying the Cause of Death
17.181 The Discussion Paper invited views on the practical value of requiring the doctor
completing Form 2 to undertake a physical examination of the body. A wide range of views
was expressed on this issue. Some respondents believed that, in every case, the doctor
completing Form 2 should perform a full external examination. Others thought that this
would not be necessary so long as the person completing Form 1 had performed a full
examination. One group of consultees felt that, in any event, an external examination was
of little practical value and would lead to unnecessary delay.
17.182 At the seminars, Dr Evans, on behalf of the RCP, expressed the viewthat, if the doctor
completing Form 2 had not also completed Form 1, s/he should be required to examine
the body. He said that the doctor should be looking for signs of criminal involvement or a
lack of care, such as bedsores. He said that, when he was asked to complete a cremation
Form C, he would view both sides of the deceased’s naked body and look for ‘pressure
sores and the like’. He would expect the examination carried out by the Form 2 doctor to
be similar in nature. Dr Evans agreed that such an examination would be easier in a
hospital than at the premises of funeral directors (where the facilities are not always ideal),
but he thought that an examination of this kind should be possible, even so. He recognised
that a requirement for an examination in every case would impose a greater burden on
doctors because, at present, there is an examination only where the body is to be
cremated. Nevertheless, he remained of the viewthat it was necessary for an examination
to be undertaken in every case.
17.183 For the BMA, Dr Pickersgill thought that it would be possible, but in certain cases
extremely difficult, to perform such an examination in the community. He said that bodies
are often dressed and in a coffin by the time the doctor attends to examine before
completing a cremation form. A doctor attending the premises of a small firm of funeral
directors might have no assistance in moving or undressing the body and would not be
able to carry out a full examination. He thought that the problem would not necessarily be
solved by imposing a rule that the body should remain undressed until the time of the
examination, because this would put great pressure on doctors to attend promptly. He
referred to the difficulty of ‘balancing the needs of the living population against the needs
of dealing with the bureaucracy in relation to the dead’ and suggested that a requirement
for a full examination by the Form 2 doctor would lead to considerable delay, particularly
447
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
in rural areas where the body might be lying some distance from the doctor’s surgery.
Dr Pickersgill said that he was not convinced that a full examination of the body was
necessary in every case. He said that an examination of the head, neck and arms would
be likely to detect most problems. If there were a major feature (e.g. a pressure sore) on
another part of the body, he would expect it to be drawn to his attention by the funeral
director. He suggested that the doctor could assess the need for a fuller examination in
each individual case, on the basis of the medical history and the account of the relatives.
17.184 Dr Grenville observed that a physical examination was rarely helpful in the diagnosis of (a
natural) cause of death. He felt that it was important for the body to be examined by
someone for signs of violence or lack of care. However, he did not believe that the
examination need be carried out by a doctor. It could, for example, be undertaken by a
funeral director or coroner’s investigator. He said that the facilities and conditions at a
funeral parlour might not be conducive to a doctor performing a thorough examination of
a body. At the seminars, he gave a graphic account of the conditions that had prevailed
at the premises of a busy funeral director when he had attended there on the previous day.
The equipment ordinarily used to take bodies down from four-tier racks was not available
and Dr Grenville had to examine a fully clothed body at shoulder height. Dr Baker agreed
with Dr Grenville and said that requiring the examination to be carried out by a doctor
would represent an inappropriate use of scarce medical resources. She thought that
funeral directors could be trained to undertake the examination.
17.185 Professor Baker referred to the examinations currently undertaken by doctors completing
cremation forms. His impression, like mine, is that such examinations are, in general,
cursory in nature. They have not been accorded a high priority and doctors have not been
properly trained in what to look for. As a result, the examinations have not been carried
out well. Nevertheless, Professor Baker felt that, if properly carried out, such examinations
might be of benefit. The main benefit that he envisaged was the opportunity to see whether
there were any reasons (e.g. signs of possible neglect such as pressure sores or weight
loss) that made it necessary to question the cause of death. He agreed that such an
examination might be carried out by someone other than a doctor, provided that the
person conducting it had the necessary skills.
17.186 Dr James was not in favour of a full examination in every case. He felt that it would be
intrusive and unnecessary to conduct a full examination in a case where the death was
expected and the condition causing the death well documented. In those cases where an
examination would be of benefit, he said that it should take place in controlled conditions,
with proper lighting and other facilities. The medical coroner should identify those cases
in which an examination is to be carried out; they might include cases where the
circumstances of the death are not completely known, where the death was unwitnessed
or where the deceased has been entirely dependent on others for his/her care. The most
appropriate person to carry out the examination, Dr James said, would be a pathologist,
although, if a requirement for an investigation by a second doctor were introduced, the
second doctor could be trained to carry out the task. However, Dr James emphasised that
proper facilities would be required, together with a system of enforcement of a proper
standard of examination. If no such system were in place, the current poor standard of
many examinations for the purposes of cremation forms would persist. Dr James felt that
448
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
there might be public disquiet at the prospect of a coroner’s investigator performing such
an intimate examination. Dr Pickersgill thought that the type of examination described by
Dr James would be outside the competence of general practitioners and would require
specific training for those undertaking it. He suggested that the necessary training could
be undertaken by a group of people other than doctors.
Comment
17.187 I do not consider that examination of the body by the doctor who is to complete Form 2 is
either necessary or appropriate. Such an examination will not assist in identifying the
cause of death. For community deaths, the requirement would place a substantial burden
on the doctor, as the body may be some distance from the doctor’s surgery. In hospital
deaths, a full examination will have already taken place.
Examination by the Funeral Director or Mortuary Technician
17.188 The suggestion that funeral directors might be required to carry out a visual inspection of
bodies passing through their premises, and to complete a form recording their findings,
met with a mixed response from the different groups representing members of the
profession. In written responses, the National Society of Allied and Independent Funeral
Directors opposed the suggestion that an obligation might be placed on funeral directors
to complete such a form, on the basis that they were not qualified to do so. However, the
National Association of Funeral Directors did not envisage any problems in principle with
completing a form such as Form 4, although the Association’s response suggested that,
if a statutory duty were imposed on funeral directors and hospital mortuary technicians to
report to the coroner anything unusual or untoward, there would be no need for the form.
The British Institute of Funeral Directors also gave broad support to the proposal. The
Institute’s response suggested that funeral directors could provide a further independent
check in the system. It was also suggested that, in order to perform the examination,
funeral directors would require specific training, which could be provided through the
Institute.
17.189 A number of participants at the seminars supported the idea that an examination for signs
of violence and neglect could be carried out by someone other than a doctor; some,
including Dr Grenville and Dr Pickersgill, thought that funeral directors would be ideally
placed to undertake the examination. Dr Evans expressed the viewthat such an obligation
could also be placed on mortuary technicians and that a protocol or checklist could be
devised to assist in the performance of the examination.
Comment
17.190 In my view, funeral directors and mortuary technicians are well placed to observe any sign
of violence or neglect. I consider that if they are placed under a duty to report any physical
signs giving cause for concern, there will be no need for a form to be completed.
The Interface between the Medical Coroner and the Judicial Coroner
17.191 Under the Inquiry’s working model, it was envisaged that the coroner service would be a
unified service. All deaths referred to the coroner system would go first to the medical
449
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
coroner, who would institute an investigation into the circumstances and cause of death.
If the police or another agency were investigating the death, the medical coroner would
be responsible for conducting, or assisting in the conduct of, any necessary medical
investigations. The medical coroner would then review the evidence and certify the cause
of death if able to do so. Alternatively, the medical coroner would order a medical
examination, such as an autopsy, after which s/he would again review the evidence to see
whether the cause of death could be certified. It was envisaged that the medical coroner
would refer a death to the judicial coroner only in a case where the factual issues
surrounding the death were uncertain, or in dispute, or might otherwise require resolution
by way of a judicial hearing.
17.192 There was wide agreement among participants at the seminars that, whatever the internal
arrangements within the coroner service, there should be a single service encompassing
legal and medical expertise. The public should have a single point of entry to a unified
coroner service.
17.193 There was less agreement about the more difficult question of internal division of
responsibility for investigation and decision making between the two coroners. At the
seminars, the discussion about the interface between the medical coroner and the judicial
coroner, and their respective spheres of responsibility, was illustrated by reference to
several different types and levels of investigation that might arise.
17.194 At the seminars, it was suggested by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry that a death might
be investigated in the first instance by a coroner’s investigator, under the direction of the
medical coroner. If the investigation were concluded and the medical coroner decided
that s/he was able to certify the cause of death without autopsy, and provided that there
was no reason for the coroner service to be further involved (i.e. the family had no
concerns, there were no public interest considerations, etc.), the medical coroner would
certify the cause of death and the judicial coroner would not be involved. That approach
was generally accepted. On behalf of the Coroners’ Society, Mr Burgess said that a
considerable number of deaths would fall into this category. In such cases, the
investigations would be undertaken, and the decisions made, by the medical coroner and
his/her staff, without any, or any substantial, input from the judicial coroner.
17.195 The discussion then moved on to the case where an autopsy would be required in order
for the cause of death to be determined. Mr Burgess accepted that, if the medical coroner
were an independent office-holder, it might be appropriate for him/her to make the
decision as to whether an autopsy should or should not be held. That decision should,
however, be subject to challenge by a properly interested party, usually a member or
members of the deceased’s family. It was suggested that the challenge, on an issue of fact
or law, should be directed to and determined by the judicial coroner.
17.196 The third type of case discussed at the seminars had an additional element, namely that
there was something about the circumstances or cause of death that required further
investigation. Counsel gave an example that might arise. The deceased had apparently
died after falling from a ladder whilst carrying out do-it-yourself work at home. Participants
were asked to assume that an inquest in such a case was not mandatory, as it would be
under the current system. They were asked for their views as to whether it might be
450
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
appropriate for the medical coroner to carry out or direct the investigation into the
circumstances of the death, and then (provided that there was no public interest or other
element making an inquest necessary) to write a report setting out his/her findings as to
the circumstances and cause of death.
17.197 Mr Burgess felt that it would be appropriate for the judicial (rather than the medical)
coroner to investigate the circumstances of the death and to reach conclusions thereon.
Issues of fact which were essentially non-medical were outside the medical coroner’s
sphere of expertise and would be better understood by the judicial coroner. In the
example given by Counsel, he pointed out that the ladder might have been defective or
of poor design. Those possibilities would have to be investigated and it would be
appropriate for that investigation to be done by the judicial coroner. It was suggested that
protocols might be developed to assist in the ‘standard’ type of investigation. Such a
protocol might, for example, provide that, in every case where the death was associated
with use of a piece of equipment (such as a ladder), the coroner should arrange for that
equipment to be tested for defects. Mr Burgess was asked whether, if that were done,
straightforward investigations of this sort would really need the input of a judicial coroner.
In reply, he questioned the usefulness of protocols and reiterated his belief that, if the
investigation involved matters going beyond medical issues, it should be directed by the
judicial coroner. Representing the Coroner’s Officers Association, Mrs Warner agreed
with the stance taken by Mr Burgess and said that, once a death had been classified as
‘unnatural’, according to the current understanding of the word (which would embrace the
example referred to above), responsibility for the investigation should pass to the judicial
coroner. Dr Leadbeatter agreed that, where there was any factual issue that might have
a bearing on the death, the death should be referred to the judicial coroner.
17.198 On behalf of the RCPath, Dr Acland expressed a contrary view. Taking the example of the
man falling from a ladder, he could not see why a medical coroner would not be able to
participate in and lead such an investigation. The medical coroner could attend the scene
if necessary, make an assessment of it and, ‘just as anyone else is capable of doing’, could
arrange for the ladder to be inspected by an appropriate expert. He agreed that a case
that appeared likely to be controversial or the subject of litigation should be referred to the
judicial coroner. However, he envisaged that the medical coroner and the coroner’s
officers might have done a lot of the investigative work by the time the file went to the
judicial coroner. The written response to the Discussion Paper by the Medical Protection
Society expressed their viewthat the vast majority of cases would be capable of resolution
by the medical coroner, without the need for legal expertise. The Society suggested that
the duties of the judicial coroner might best be reserved to High Court Judges who, when
the need arose, should direct those investigations requiring the input of legal expertise.
17.199 Professor Baker’s view was that the appropriate division of responsibility would depend
on the structure of the coroner’s office and the extent to which individual cases were
discussed between the medical and judicial coroner. He thought that it would be ideal if
such discussions could take place and joint decisions could be taken on the investigative
steps required. On the basis that the judicial coroner and medical coroner would work
separately, with a process of formal referral from the medical to the judicial coroner,
Professor Baker said he would ‘verge on the side of caution’ and go along with the view
451
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
that cases involving a factual element should at least be notified to the judicial coroner.
Having considered the matter further, Professor Baker referred to the need to avoid a
situation whereby the medical coroner dealt only with the straightforward cases and all the
more difficult cases were passed to the judicial coroner. He said that this would have the
effect of making the post of medical coroner ‘fairly lowlevel’ and, consequently,
unattractive and unrewarding. It might also reduce the ability of the medical coroner to
identify those cases about which s/he should be concerned. Dr Leadbeatter pointed out
that the medical coroner’s involvement would not necessarily cease once the case had
been referred to the judicial coroner. He had experience of some inquests where
witnesses relevant to the medical issues had not been called to give evidence. The
medical coroner should be able to offer advice and assistance to the judicial coroner so
as to ensure that all relevant evidence would be available.
17.200 The final type of case discussed was one in which it was obvious from an early stage
that it had a public interest or public safety element, such that it was likely that a public
hearing (or, at least, the determination of a factual issue by the judicial coroner) would
be required. The examples given were an apparent case of suicide where there was
an issue as to the provision of proper psychiatric services and the death of a young
person apparently caused by inhaling solvents. Mr Burgess felt that the judicial coroner
should be involved from the beginning of the investigation of such cases. He advocated
that judicial coroners (but not medical coroners) should have available to them powers
of entry, search and seizure of property and documents. If valuable evidence were not
to be lost, the judicial coroner should be notified of the death immediately. The scene
should be examined in the name of the judicial coroner and any necessary exhibits
seized. At first, Mr Burgess seemed to be suggesting that the judicial coroner would
have his/her own team of investigators who would collect evidence on his/her behalf.
However, he later accepted that, if there were a team of investigators at district level
which undertook both medical and circumstantial investigations, the judicial coroner
would be able to request a member or members of that team to carry out any
investigations that s/he deemed necessary over and above those already directed by
the medical coroner.
17.201 Mr Burgess was asked about the desirability of the current arrangement whereby the
coroner is responsible for directing the process of evidence gathering in a case in which
s/he is later to assume a judicial role. He could see no alternative to that arrangement. He
described how, under the existing system, a coroner often has a detailed involvement in
the evaluation and preparation of the evidence. He sawno tension between that degree
of involvement and the coroner’s judicial role. It was suggested that, in those cases which
proceeded to a public hearing, evidence gathering might be directed by a solicitor based,
with the judicial coroner, in the regional coroner’s office. The solicitor would be
responsible for taking statements in more complex cases and for preparation of cases for
hearing. Mr Burgess observed that, in his view, a properly trained coroner’s investigator
would be able to produce sufficient evidence to enable an inquest to proceed without the
need for a solicitor. For the Coroner’s Officers Association, Mrs Warner agreed that she
would expect coroner’s officers to fulfil this role, with the coroner being the ultimate arbiter
as to the adequacy of the evidence gathered.
452
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Comment
17.202 In my view, the medical coroner should be able to complete the investigation into a large
proportion of deaths. I do not think it should be necessary for the judicial coroner to be
involved just because some factual aspect of the circumstances requires investigation. I
agree with Professor Baker and Dr Leadbeatter that in some cases the medical and judicial
coroners should both contribute to the investigation. Plainly, the judicial coroner will take a
leading role in the investigation of any death where the circumstances are complex or
where the weight of the investigation relates to factual rather than medical matters.
17.203 Although Mr Burgess did not feel that there was any tension between his role as manager
of the investigation and his judicial function at an inquest, I consider that there can be such
tension. I would experience it myself if I had to play an active role in directing the
investigations carried out for this Inquiry. I give only general directions. In my view, in any
inquest case which is likely to be complex or controversial, the judicial coroner should be
able to distance him/herself from the practicalities of investigation.
Registration of Death
17.204 In order to register a death under the present system, an informant, usually the nearest
relative of the deceased, must attend at a register office and provide certain details to the
registrar. The registrar will then create an entry in the register of deaths and provide the
informant with a certified copy of the entry, generally known as the ‘death certificate’. At
the seminars, there was discussion as to whether or not the registration of death should
continue to be performed outside the coronial system, or whether there might be some
way of integrating the function of registration into the coroner service. The point was made
that, if relatives were to attend the coroner’s office in certain cases to discuss the
circumstances of the death, it would be desirable for them to be able to register the death
at the same time and thus to avoid attendance at the register office.
17.205 I referred in Chapter Six to the recent proposals for the remote registration of deaths on
the Internet or by telephone. At the seminars, it was suggested that, if such a system were
in operation, the information required to register the death could be obtained by the
coroner’s staff and passed electronically to the registrar, who could then register the
death. This would remove the necessity for two personal attendances. On behalf of the
ONS, Miss Ceinwen Lloyd did not welcome the proposal. She stressed the important role
of the registrar in providing information to relatives about administrative issues such as
obtaining state benefits, closing bank accounts and taking out probate. She felt that, even
if the cause of death were to be registered on-line, the families should still have contact
with the registration service in order for such practical advice to be given. Miss Lloyd also
made the point that there are practical advantages in the location for the registration of
both births and deaths being the same. She gave the example of the multiple birth,
following which a family might need to register a stillbirth on the same occasion as a live
birth. Miss Lloyd thought that only a minority of informants would use remote facilities if
they were made available. Most would prefer face to face registration, which constitutes
a formal recognition of the fact of the death and brings a sense of ‘closure’. She suggested
that it was likely to be only people such as executors dealing with deaths where there were
453
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
no relatives who would avail themselves of the facilities for remote registration. Miss Lloyd
acknowledged that the ONS had examined registration procedures in other jurisdictions
where there was no requirement for a face to face interview. No problems seemed to arise
with the procedures in those jurisdictions. However, she said that people in this country
expect to attend the register office following a death, whereas it is not the culture to do so
in other jurisdictions.
17.206 The Inquiry’s Forms 1 and 2 would contain far more information about the deceased’s
medical history and the circumstances surrounding the death than does the present
MCCD. Miss Lloyd did not think it appropriate for registrars to be given the task of
analysing that information at the point of registration and of determining whether or not the
death should be registered or referred to the medical coroner. She said that registrars do
not have the necessary medical knowledge to fulfil this role.
17.207 Miss Lloyd thought that it might be possible for a registrar to be seconded to a coroner’s
office, as occurs in hospitals under the current system, so that families could register the
death at the same time as attending the coroner’s office for interview. Dr Leadbeatter
supported the idea of the ‘one-stop shop’, with all the post-death processes dealt with at
one physical location. Miss Lloyd mentioned a number of practical difficulties that might
be associated with locating registrars in coroner’s offices. These included the effects on
staffing levels and possible inconvenience to the public if coroner’s offices were based
less locally than register offices. At the present time, coroners and registrars operate out
of the same building in some areas. In his written response to the Coroners Review,
Mr M J F Sheffield, HM Coroner for Teesside, said that he had found it advantageous
having the registrars located in the same building as his own office.
17.208 In its written response to the Discussion Paper, the Death Certification Advisory Group of
the ONS expressed concern that, under the current system, the ONS is not informed of
deaths which are the subject of inquests until the conclusion of the inquest proceedings.
That can be months, even years, after the death. This has an impact on mortality data
which is used for public surveillance and monitoring standards of healthcare. At the
seminars, Miss Lloyd said that she hoped that this matter could be addressed. The ONS
would like to be informed promptly of the fact that a death had occurred and, if possible,
of the cause of death. For the Coroners’ Society, Mr Burgess thought that there was no
reason why, under a revised system, that information could not be provided to the registrar
soon after the death. He drew a parallel with the current system whereby, if an inquest is
adjourned under the provisions of section 16 of the Coroners Act 1988, the coroner must
provide to the registrar a certificate stating, so far as they have been ascertained at that
time, the particulars required to be registered concerning the death.
17.209 There was support for the idea that information about the cause of death should not be
released into the public domain and should be capable of being accessed by limited
categories of person only.
The Inquiry’s New Forms
Before the Seminars
17.210 In its Discussion Paper, the Inquiry proposed that four newforms should be introduced.
The person certifying the fact of death should record the circumstances of death on
454
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Form 1. The existing MCCD and cremation forms would be replaced by Form 2, to be
completed by the treating doctor. A family member or other responsible person would
complete Form 3, confirming the deceased’s medical history and the accuracy of the
accounts put forward by those completing Forms 1 and 2. Finally, having carried out an
examination of the body, the funeral director would complete Form 4, confirming whether
or not there were any external injuries on the body which might give rise to suspicion. I
have already referred to discussion about these forms in the course of this Chapter.
17.211 Views were sought as to the desirability of introducing the forms, as to their content and
as to any practical problems which might arise from their completion. Respondents to the
Discussion Paper expressed a number of concerns about the content of the forms, as then
drafted. By the time of the seminars, the Inquiry had moved away from its original
suggestion that relatives should be required to complete a form such as Form 3. The
Inquiry had also realised that Forms 1 and 2 would have to be greatly simplified if they were
not going to be unacceptably burdensome to complete.
Discussion at the Seminars
17.212 With those factors in mind, a detailed discussion of the content of the forms took place at
the last seminar, which was dedicated to a discussion of the forms. One of the issues
canvassed was how new technology might be used to assist in the completion and
transmission of the forms. The hope was shared by all that both Forms 1 and 2 might be
completed electronically. Participants at an earlier seminar had pointed out that it is not
unusual for employees of utility companies, for example, to visit householders to inspect
boilers and other equipment and to record and transmit their findings, using a handheld
computer. If that were to be done in the case of Form 1, it would enable the form to be
transmitted (by the ambulance service, for example, or a deputising doctor service)
straight to the coroner’s office. Dr Baker, for the RCGP, suggested that Form 2, which
would usually be completed by the treating doctor, might have self-populating fields
linked to a patient’s electronic records so that some details could be inserted on the form
automatically without the need to key them in manually. That would save valuable time.
Dr Evans, for the RCGP, had previously observed at a seminar that the task of completing
Form 2 and sending it to the medical coroner using a computer on a hospital ward would
be a great deal easier for a doctor than having to make his/her way to the hospital
bereavement office to complete an MCCD or a Form B. Electronic transmission of forms
would obviously speed up the whole process of getting information to the medical
coroner. The possibility of sending to the medical coroner, with Form 2, a small bundle of
the most significant medical records was also discussed. This is likely to become relatively
easy in the near future when the categories of computerised record to be sent could be
identified and selected in advance. Dr Evans suggested that, in hospital, the drug cardex
could be photocopied and sent with Form 2.
17.213 One point which emerged clearly from the seminar was that the forms (in particular,
Form 1) would require adaptation for use in hospital. The Inquiry has therefore designed
new Forms 1 and 2 for hospital use, as well as a third version of Form 1, to be used when
death occurs in, or is confirmed upon arrival at, a hospital accident and emergency
department.
455
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
17.214 At the seminar, there was discussion of the Inquiry’s ideas for simplified versions of the
questions on Forms 1 and 2. To a large extent, these appeared to meet the concerns which
had been expressed by organisations such as the RCGP, the BMA and the RCP.
Discussion also centred around the time which it would take to complete the forms.
Respondents to the Discussion Paper had been very concerned about the length of time
that would be required to complete the forms, particularly in the case of a patient who had
suffered from a long and complex illness.
17.215 In the light of the proposed simplification of the forms, participants at the seminar
expressed less concern about the time which completion of the forms was likely to take.
Dr Baker, representing the RCGP, held the most pessimistic viewas to the likely time
required. In the light of the simplification of the forms which was proposed, she reduced
her estimate to an additional one hour over and above the time at present taken to
complete the MCCD and cremation Form B. She made the point, however, that she was
only able to offer an estimate and that undertaking a pilot study would be the best way of
establishing the time that would be required. Dr Pickersgill suggested that the completion
of the forms would take, on average, an hour in total and not, as Dr Baker believed, an
additional hour. He said that it would take a similar time to the process of consulting the
medical records, writing the MCCD, travelling to the funeral director’s premises to
examine the body, completing the Form B and consulting with the Form C doctor. The
latter steps, of course, assume that the deceased is to be cremated. He pointed out, that
under the newsystem, the doctor completing Form 2 would have to speak to the medical
coroner. But the total time taken would be approximately the same. The point was also
made at the seminars that only one doctor would be involved in completing the proposed
forms, unlike the current cremation procedures which require forms to be completed by
two doctors.
17.216 At the seminars, Dr Evans, for the RCP, said that, in the context of a hospital death, the
completion of Form B, on a worst case scenario, could take up to an hour. He thought that
a doctor familiar with the case would be able to complete the form more quickly and
suggested that the best person to complete the form would be the treating senior house
officer or registrar. Dr Aylin suggested that time and resources could be saved in hospital
by the forms having a dual purpose. He suggested that a copy of Form 1 could go into the
patient’s notes and become the final entry in the notes. A copy of Form 2 could be sent to
the patient’s general practitioner in place of a discharge letter, thereby removing the need
for a separate discharge letter to be composed and sent. Dr Aylin’s suggestion received
broad support at the seminars and a number of further practical benefits flowing from it
were identified. Dr Pickersgill thought that Form 2 would greatly assist general
practitioners in dealing with the needs of the bereaved family members following a death.
They would receive the information quickly and in far greater detail than at present.
Dr Baker also agreed that Form 2 would be an invaluable tool for internal audit in general
practice.
The Feasibility Study
17.217 The Inquiry commissioned a small feasibility study to be undertaken by the Department of
General Practice and Primary Health Care at the University of Leicester. The Report of that
study was submitted in March 2003. The aims of the study were:
456
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
- to assess the feasibility of using the newdeath certification forms for deaths in
hospital and in the community
- to assess the views of doctors and relatives on the practical aspects of filling in the
forms, information requested, ease of interpreting the questions, and usefulness of
the information
- to identify any problems with the proposed forms.
17.218 The study team was provided by the ONS with details of recent deaths registered at the
Leicester register office. A sample of general practitioners and hospital doctors named as
having certified the deaths were invited to take part. They were asked to complete the new
Forms 1 and 2 (in the form in which they appeared in the Discussion Paper) as though they
were certifying the fact and cause of death. Where the doctors were able to contact a
relative, the relative was invited to complete Form 3. In cases where the fact of death had
been confirmed by an out of hours doctor, s/he was invited to pilot Form 1. Participating
doctors and relatives were interviewed by a member of the research team to elicit their
views on the proposals in general and explore any problems encountered with specific
questions on the forms.
17.219 Nineteen general practitioners, ten hospital doctors, two ‘out of hours’ doctors and six
relatives participated in the study. The study team reported that there was general support
for the viewthat the current death and certification processes should be overhauled.
However, there was less agreement about the desirability of involving relatives to the
extent suggested. The relatives interviewed had had difficulty in understanding and
completing the forms and several of them felt that a requirement to do so would be too
emotionally traumatising. That served to confirm the viewalready formed by the Inquiry
that it would be inappropriate to require relatives to complete a form such as Form 3.
17.220 The Report prepared by the study team made a number of specific points about the forms.
It was suggested that it might be preferable to have different forms for community and
hospital deaths and the need for training and supporting materials for doctors
implementing any new system of certification was emphasised. There was concern about
the complexity of the forms and the amount of information which was required in order to
complete them. Many of those concerns have been met by the changes which have been
made to the proposed forms.
17.221 The study showed that, in practice, it appeared to take less time than had been estimated
for the forms to be completed, despite the fact that the original version of the forms was
used. The doctors participating in the study took varying amounts of time to complete the
forms. The shortest time taken to complete both forms was 20 minutes and the longest one
hour, with an average of something in the region of half an hour. A number of doctors said
that they thought that the time taken would reduce with familiarity. The study team
concluded that the time taken to complete the forms was mainly determined by the
knowledge that the doctor had of the deceased as a patient. In the study, forms were
completed retrospectively, on average six to eight weeks after the death and the point was
made by some participating doctors that the process would be quicker if the forms were
completed immediately after the death.
457
SHIP03$$29 25-06-03 13:35:34 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P017 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
17.222 Concerns were expressed about the impact on minority groups in the event that the new
system proved to be slower than the old one. Doctors participating in the study also raised
the issue of payment to doctors for completion of forms. At present, doctors receive
payments from relatives for completion of cremation Forms B and C but no payment for
completion of an MCCD.
The Result of the Consultation Process
17.223 The exercise of publishing the Discussion Paper prior to the Stage Two hearings had the
effect of crystallising the Inquiry’s thinking on the detailed arrangements for a newsystem
at that stage. That thinking underwent significant changes as I heard the oral evidence
relating to Stage Two. It underwent further change as I became aware of the responses to
the Discussion Paper and participated in the discussions at the seminars. The
consultation process produced many ideas that had a significant effect on my thinking
and, as will be evident from this Report, it has had a considerable influence upon my final
recommendations.
458
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 2
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Systems of Death Investigation and Certification in Other
Jurisdictions
Introduction
18.1 In the course of preparations for Phase Two, Stage Two of the Inquiry hearings, the
Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, Dr AneezEsmail, identified and visited five jurisdictions
whose systems of death investigation and certification would, he felt, be of interest to the
Inquiry. Those jurisdictions were the states of Victoria (Australia) and Maryland (USA), the
province of Ontario (Canada) and the countries of Finland and Scotland. A representative
from each of those jurisdictions was invited to attend one of the Inquiry’s seminars, held
on 16th–17th January 2003. Also participating in the seminar was Professor Richard Baker,
Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit at the University of
Leicester.
18.2 Before the seminars, the representatives provided a considerable amount of written
information about the systems operating in their jurisdictions. Each representative had
been asked to consider a brief summary of the facts of four of Shipman’s unlawful killings
and to provide written comments upon how the system in his/her jurisdiction would have
dealt with the death. The object of this exercise was to see whether each of the systems
under examination would or might have been effective in detecting Shipman’s criminal
activities.
18.3 At the seminars, each representative gave a short presentation, describing the system in
his/her jurisdiction. Each then answered questions put by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry.
Other participants in the seminars also had the opportunity of asking questions. As with
the other seminars, persons attending the seminar as observers were able to raise points
through Counsel for the consideration of seminar participants.
18.4 I found the presentations interesting and highly instructive. Each has contributed to my
thinking about some aspect of my proposals for the future. I wish to express my gratitude
to all five representatives for their attendance, their written contributions, their oral
presentations and for the lively debate in which they joined.
18.5 In this Chapter, I shall summarise the main points of the systems in the five jurisdictions
about which the Inquiry heard, with particular reference to those features of the systems
which might with benefit be borrowed or adapted for use in England and Wales.
The System in Victoria, Australia
18.6 Professor Stephen Cordner, Professor of Forensic Medicine and Director of the Victorian
Institute of Forensic Medicine, attended the seminar and described the system in Victoria.
Background and Structure
18.7 The coronial and death certification systems differ from state to state in Australia. The eight
systems all operate along broadly the same lines, but with differences of detail. All the
systems are derived from that in England and Wales.
459
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
18.8 The population of Victoria is approximately 4.8 million. The number of deaths is about
35,000 each year, of which about 10% are referred to the coroner. Autopsies are
performed on behalf of the coroner in around 3000 of those cases. Toxicology is
undertaken in around 2000 cases and, in about 1500 of those cases, toxicological testing
extends beyond testing simply for the presence of alcohol.
18.9 The Victoria State Coroner, who is legally qualified, has responsibility for the coronial
system as a whole. He is based, together with four full-time coroners, at the Coronial
Services Centre in Melbourne. The Institute of Forensic Medicine (‘the Institute’) operates
out of the same building and works closely with, but independently of, the coronial system.
The Institute is an independent statutory authority, as well as a University Department.
Professor Cordner observed that its functions complement each other. Its coronial service
obligations inform its teaching and research functions; those functions in turn support its
service obligations. Autopsies for deaths occurring within the city of Melbourne are
performed at the Institute. The quality of its forensic pathology services, and the way in
which they work in close partnership with the coronial service, are particularly strong
features of the Victoria death investigation system. Outside Melbourne, all magistrates,
who in Victoria are legally qualified judicial officers, act as coroners. If a contentious matter
arises in a country area, a full-time coroner may be sent to deal with it. In those areas,
because of the large distances involved, autopsies are carried out by local pathologists,
acting as agents of the Institute.
18.10 Professor Cordner referred to the advantages of having a single individual, the State
Coroner, responsible for the coroner system. Before that arrangement was introduced,
there was considerable variation of practice between different coroners. Now, there is
consistency and reliability of outcomes within the jurisdiction. The State Coroner is
appointed from the magistracy for three years. He or she may be re-appointed but, if not,
returns to the magistracy. As well as the leadership provided by the State Coroner,
Professor Cordner also provides advice and guidance to support and assist those
working in the fields of death investigation and certification.
Statutory Framework
18.11 Model national legislation was introduced in Australia in the mid-1990s in an attempt to
bring national uniformity to coronial law and practice. That legislation has been
implemented to varying degrees across the eight states. In Victoria, the Coroners Act
1985 (as amended) remains in force. The Act established the office of the State Coroner.
It also defined the categories of death to be reported to the coroner, and the procedure
to be adopted by the coroner in the investigation of death and the holding of inquests. The
procedure for the registration of deaths is set out in the Births, Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1996.
Objectives
18.12 The modern emphasis of the coroner’s role is on death and injury prevention. It has been
recognised in Victoria that there is an important public interest in learning lessons from
preventable deaths.
460
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Deaths Not Reported to the Coroner
18.13 Deaths that are ‘not unexpected’ are not reported to the coroner. Where the death is not
to be reported to the coroner, the doctor must give notice of death and cause of death to
the registrar and the funeral director within 48 hours of the death. The registrar is notified
by post and the family need not take any further steps to register the death. There is no
requirement for the family to visit the registration authorities. Any registered doctor has the
authority to certify the cause of death, regardless of experience or seniority. The standard
of confidence that a doctor should have when diagnosing cause of death should,
Professor Cordner said, be the same standard used by that doctor when making a good
diagnosis in clinical practice.
18.14 The model national legislation widened the category of doctor authorised to certify the
cause of death beyond the treating doctor. It now includes partners in a group practice
and any doctor, who may or may not have had previous contact with the deceased, but
who has had access to the medical records. Any doctor who has seen the body after death
has the authority, at least in theory, to certify the cause of death. In practice, doctors are
told not to certify on the basis of an examination of the body after death without a reliable
history, including a history of the circumstances of death.
18.15 Like the system in England and Wales, the certification system in Victoria is wholly
dependent on the integrity of the certifying doctor. There is no audit or quality assurance
of certification. Professor Cordner observed that, in Victoria, as elsewhere, the completion
of medical certificates of cause of death is flawed. He referred to the lack of training in the
subject and the lack of enthusiasm for it amongst medical students.
Deaths Reported to the Coroner
18.16 The categories of death requiring referral to the coroner differ from state to state but, in
general, include violent, unnatural and sudden deaths, together with certain other specific
categories of death. Those categories of death also include deaths in custody and deaths
where no medical certificate of cause of death has been signed. The coroner’s jurisdiction
is limited to reportable deaths and does not extend to all deaths within the geographical
jurisdiction. The statutory duty to report a reportable death is broad and extends to any
person with knowledge of the death who has reasonable grounds to believe that the death
has not already been reported. A criminal sanction for failure to report exists but is never
imposed in practice. Professor Cordner said that there was not a high degree of
awareness among the public of the duty to report. One perceived weakness of the system
is its reliance upon persons reporting deaths to the coroner. Also, Professor Cordner
observed that a particular emphasis is placed on the need to report deaths that are
immediately identified as unnatural, with less emphasis being placed on the need to report
and investigate sudden deaths which are thought to have a natural cause.
18.17 The State Coroner’s Office in Melbourne is staffed by coroner’s clerks. The clerks are the
first point of contact for a doctor telephoning to report a death or to make an enquiry as to
the need to report. They are administrators who commonly have worked as court clerks
and receive no formal training in legal or medical issues. In country areas, the magistrate’s
461
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
court staff will act as coroner’s clerks. When a doctor telephones to report a death, the
clerk may, in some circumstances, give advice as to whether or not a doctor should report
the death, or may advise the doctor to certify the cause of death. That advice might be
given without formal reference to the coroner.
Death Investigation
18.18 Once a death has been reported to the coroner, investigations are undertaken by the
police, acting as agents of the coroner. A small team of five police officers is seconded to
the State Coroner’s Office in Melbourne. Those officers oversee investigations carried out
by the local police force. They also carry out investigations into particular types of death
which require specific expertise and knowledge. For example, they might investigate a
small plane crash or scuba diving accident. Outside Melbourne, coroners are entirely
dependent on local police officers to investigate deaths. Coroners have powers to enter
and inspect premises and to seize documents and other material in the course of their
investigations.
18.19 The decision as to whether an autopsy should be performed is made in the first instance
by the coroner. The pathologist will then form his/her own judgement as to whether an
autopsy is required or whether s/he can certify the cause of death without carrying out an
invasive examination. In reaching that decision, the pathologist will have an opportunity to
examine the body externally and will also have available to him/her the police report
containing information about the circumstances of death. Medical records are not
generally available at that stage, unless the death occurred in hospital. The treating doctor
will rarely be contacted unless the pathologist wishes to enquire why the doctor feels
unable to certify the cause of death. If a decision is taken not to carry out an autopsy,
Professor Cordner said that there will usually be some consultation with the family to
ensure that they are happy with the decision.
18.20 Where it is decided that an autopsy should (or should not) be carried out, relatives have
a right to object. The coroner’s decision is subject to a right of appeal to the Supreme Court
of Victoria; in practice, that right is rarely exercised.
18.21 Extensive toxicology, designed to identify any one of a long list of drugs (including
morphine), is carried out in approximately half of the autopsy cases in Victoria. The cost
of toxicology in an individual case is approximately £250.
18.22 At the end of an investigation, whatever the outcome, the family has access to a document
setting out what is known of the circumstances of their relative’s death. Documents arising
out of the investigation are entirely public.
18.23 The process for the investigation of deaths potentially caused by adverse medical
incidents is undergoing reform. In a recent article on the investigation of deaths caused
or contributed to by adverse medical incidents, Dr David Ranson, the Deputy Director at
the Institute, noted that a large number of such cases go unreported and those that are
reported have traditionally been investigated in the same way as all other deaths
investigated by the coroner. The investigation consists of the police taking statements
from doctors involved in the provision of treatment, and from other witnesses. Also, a
462
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
pathologist will carry out an autopsy, on the basis of the information obtained by the police.
Dr Ranson observed that the police have little direct experience or knowledge of the
specialist medical issues involved in such a death. A potential problem might be missed
because the doctors who are interviewed may not be forthcoming in identifying system
failures. He also observed that the issues might not be picked up by the coroner’s
pathologist, who is unlikely to be aware of current practice issues in the entire range of
specialist areas.
18.24 A medical death investigation team has recently been established in Victoria. This adopts
a very different approach to the investigation of deaths occurring in a medical setting.
Cases are first screened by nursing staff against a set of diagnostic criteria and audit
filters, to identify cases where there is a high likelihood that an adverse medical event has
occurred. The information from the screening process is then passed, with the medical
records, to the forensic pathologist conducting the autopsy. Once the results of the
autopsy are available, the death will be reviewed by two clinical medical specialists from
different clinical disciplines, who are employed on a part-time basis at the Institute. The
specialists evaluate the records and identify areas where it would be prudent to obtain
relevant witness statements. The specialists also draft specific questions to be put to
witnesses and, if required, to an independent medical expert. The new investigative
approach is still in its infancy but it is hoped that, in time, the process will lead to
improvements in the safe delivery of healthcare.
Judicial Investigation of Death
18.25 The majority of inquests in Victoria are held at the coroner’s discretion, usually because
there is a matter of public interest to be investigated. There are certain limited categories
of mandatory inquests in cases of homicide, deaths where the deceased person is held
in care and cases where the deceased is unidentified. Inquests into suicides are rare, as
are inquests into deaths sustained in road traffic accidents, unless an issue of public
safety and death prevention arises. Deaths that occur in the workplace commonly result
in an inquest because of the potential for learning from the death and preventing future
accidents of a similar nature. The views of the family are an important factor when taking
a decision whether or not to proceed to an inquest. Inquests in Melbourne are presided
over by full-time coroners. Outside Melbourne, magistrates sit in non-controversial cases.
There is provision in the legislation for juries to sit on inquests, but no jury has sat for many
years. Verdicts following an inquest are descriptive. Recommendations may be made,
particularly if a number of deaths have occurred in similar circumstances. In some states,
although not in Victoria, the appropriate authority is under an obligation to respond to
recommendations made.
Cremation
18.26 If a death is reported to the coroner, the coroner will authorise cremation. Otherwise, a
cremation form is completed by the medical practitioner who was responsible for the
deceased’s medical care immediately before death. A second doctor and the
crematorium medical referee must also complete cremation forms. The second doctor is
463
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
required to examine the body, but will rarely contact the deceased’s relatives or carers.
Professor Cordner observed that his impression was that any independent enquiry by a
second doctor in a cremation case was a rarity.
National Coroners Information System
18.27 The National Coroners Information System (NCIS) is a computer database, which was
established in 2000 and is based at the Monash University National Centre for Coronial
Information, Melbourne. The NCIS receives and records information on the 18,000 or so
deaths reported to coroners in Australia each year. Prior to the introduction of NCIS, the
collection and analysis of coronial data was a slow process. For example, a Commission
set up in 1989 to look at work-related deaths spent six years visiting each of the eight
states collecting data, much of which was outdated by the time the Commission reported
in 1998. Professor Cordner said that the NCIS has transformed the way in which such
information can be obtained and studied.
18.28 The database provides coroners with information about deaths occurring in other parts of
the country. It allows coroners to identify patterns in preventable deaths which, on the
basis of the limited information within an individual coroner’s jurisdiction, might otherwise
go unnoticed. The database also reduces repetition of work. For example, one coroner
might not hold an inquest into a particular type of death if s/he knows that a coroner in
another state has already investigated that type of death in detail and that the lessons in
terms of death prevention have already been learned.
18.29 Data from the NCIS is made available, not only to coroners, but also to Government
agencies and other public sector organisations, particularly those involved in health
policy. They use the NCIS to monitor particular types of death and identify health and
safety issues.
Detecting Shipman
18.30 On the basis of the summaries describing the circumstances of four of Shipman’s unlawful
killings, Professor Cordner formed the view that Shipman’s activities would not have been
detected by the Victoria system. In relation to the case of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, he said
that there would be an issue as to whether the death could properly have been certified as
due to ‘old age’. This cause of death might or might not have been queried by a registrar.
However, if the death had been reported to the coroner, the coroner’s clerk might well
have encouraged the doctor to certify the cause of death, on the ground that, even though
the death was possibly unexpected, it was apparently (on the doctor’s account) natural.
If an autopsy had been carried out, so long as there was sufficient coronary artery disease
to account for death, further investigation would probably not have been ordered. In the
absence of heart disease, histology would have been ordered and samples for toxicology
taken, to be analysed only in the event that the cause of death was not established by
histology.
Comments
18.31 The modern role of the Victoria coroner system in the field of death and injury prevention
is one which, in my view, the system in England and Wales should also embrace. In order
for that to be done, a system such as the NCIS is plainly necessary.
464
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
18.32 The evident quality of the independent forensic pathology services in Victoria, their
position at the centre of the death investigation and certification system and the close
working relationship between the coronial and forensic pathology services are all
important features of the system in Victoria. They provide a model which could, with
benefit, be adapted for use in England and Wales.
18.33 I was also most interested in the proposals for the identification and investigation of deaths
associated with medical care. I shall recommend that similar measures be considered for
the investigation of that type of case in England and Wales.
18.34 I was also impressed by the evidence of leadership offered by both the State Coroner and
by Professor Cordner, as Director of the Institute with responsibility for forensic pathology.
It is clear that the leadership which they offer is of great benefit in achieving consistency,
as well as in encouraging good practice and in supporting the work of those with
day-to-day responsibility for the operation of the coronial and death certification systems.
The System in Ontario, Canada
18.35 Dr James Young, Chief Coroner for the Province of Ontario and Assistant Deputy Minister
of the Solicitor-General, attended the seminar and described the system in Ontario.
Background and Structure
18.36 Each of the provinces and territories in Canada has a Chief Coroner or Medical Examiner,
who acts as the head of the coronial and death certification system. Ontario has a
population of 13 million, spread over an area of one million square kilometres. Much of the
population lives in a relatively densely populated area within 100 miles of the US border,
but there are vast areas of the province which are sparsely populated. The geography and
climate of Ontario present significant challenges to the coronial system. Approximately
60,000 deaths occur each year, and the Chief Coroner’s Office investigates and reports
on around 20,000 of those deaths. A limited investigation is carried out in relation to a
further 10,000 deaths, which occur in nursing homes and residential homes for the elderly.
Autopsies are performed in around 7000 cases, which represents a little over a third of
those deaths formally investigated.
18.37 The Chief Coroner has overall responsibility and control over the province-wide system.
Authority is delegated to three deputy chief coroners and ten regional supervising
coroners, each of whom covers one of the ten geographical areas into which the
province’s coronial system is divided. There are then about 350 investigating coroners,
who attend scenes of death and who are supervised by the regional supervising coroners.
All coroners in Ontario are licensed physicians. The investigating coroners have a variety
of medical backgrounds, both within and outside hospital, and undertake their coronial
duties as part-time additional work for which they are remunerated on a case-by-case
basis. Local arrangements are made for rota cover to provide a service 24 hours a day,
seven days a week. A system of ‘first on call’ and ‘second on call’ is operated, so that a
member of staff is always available when needed. Standards in the office require that an
investigating coroner should be able to attend at the scene of a death within two to three
465
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
hours. Despite the antisocial hours, recruiting for the post of an investigating coroner
apparently presents no problems.
18.38 The Chief Coroner is responsible for establishing standards for death investigations. He
also directs, controls and supervises death investigations, together with the delivery of
forensic pathology services. He offers advice and guidance, both personally and through
his deputies and the regional supervising coroners. There is a clear line of authority and
accountability within the coroner service in Ontario.
18.39 There is obvious potential for tension where a doctor in a small, rural community acts as
an investigating coroner. He or she may be called upon to investigate deaths of patients
of colleagues who are well known to him/her. Investigating coroners are given clear advice
about this and are advised to refer a death upwards to the regional supervising coroner,
even to the Chief Coroner’s Office, if any potential conflict arises. They are also reminded
of the importance of considering the ‘worst case scenario’ in relation to every death, even
when dealing with the death of a colleague’s patient.
18.40 It is evident from the documents with which the Inquiry has been provided that the coronial
service in Ontario seeks, and, is successful in securing for itself, a high public profile. That
profile ensures that the public is aware both of the existence of the service and of the
mechanism of investigating deaths about which there is any concern or problem. This acts
as a positive encouragement to report deaths about which any concern arises.
Statutory Framework
18.41 The statutory framework for the Ontario system is contained in the Coroners Act 1990 and
the Anatomy Act 1980.
Objectives
18.42 The motto of the Ontario Chief Coroner’s Office is ‘We Speak for the Dead to Protect the
Living’. In practical terms, the objective of providing protection to the people of Ontario
is achieved by implementing high quality death investigation and using the findings to
generate recommendations to improve public safety and to prevent further deaths
occurring in similar circumstances. The ethos is that no death should be overlooked,
concealed or ignored. The Chief Coroner’s Office is assisted in achieving its objectives by
the high public awareness of the coroner system. Individuals and organisations are
encouraged to ‘over-report’ deaths, even at the risk of time being wasted investigating
deaths which might in the event be found to have been entirely natural.
Deaths Not Reported to the Coroner
18.43 Where a doctor is able and willing to certify the cause of death, the coroner will not become
aware of the death until after disposal. A body can be removed to a funeral home only
when a certificate as to cause of death has been issued by a doctor or nurse practitioner,
or where an investigating coroner has attended and authorised removal of the body. A
nurse practitioner can certify the cause of death only in limited circumstances, namely in
a case of expected death at home (i.e. not in a nursing home etc.), where the nurse
466
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
practitioner has had primary responsibility for care, an established diagnosis of a terminal
illness has been made and the patient was receiving palliative care. Any registered doctor
is authorised to certify the cause of death in an appropriate case, regardless of experience
or seniority. There is no formal requirement for a doctor to examine the body in order to
certify the cause of death. The standard of confidence for certifying the cause of death is
similar to that in Victoria, i.e. the same standard as for diagnosing a condition in a living
patient.
18.44 Although only certain deaths must be reported to the coroner in the first instance, the
death certificates in relation to all deaths are ultimately sent to the Chief Coroner’s Office.
Individual certificates are audited to see if the death should, in fact, have been reported.
The ambit of the audit is necessarily limited, since it will detect only errors which are
evident on the face of the death certificate.
Deaths Reported to the Coroner
18.45 The coroner’s jurisdiction is limited to ‘reportable deaths’ and does not extend to all
deaths within the geographical jurisdiction. The categories of reportable deaths are wide
and contain a provision that ‘any death requiring investigation’ should be reported.
A statutory duty to report deaths to the coroner extends to every person with reason to
believe that a person died within a list of particular circumstances, including sudden
death, death caused by violence, negligence and other similar categories, as well
as some broader categories such as ‘death by unfair means’. The duty is subject
to a criminal sanction which is rarely imposed. Literature produced by the Chief
Coroner’s Office acknowledges that the categories of reportable deaths tend to be
‘confusing’.
18.46 The Coroners Act provides that all deaths that occur in residential or in-patient institutions
must be reported to the coroner. In practice, this legislative requirement is fulfilled by
requiring nursing homes to keep a book of all deaths and to report every tenth death to the
coroner. Those deaths are then investigated by means of a paper review. They are then
available for audit, or further investigation at a later time if necessary. A death reportable
for any other reason must be reported to the coroner in the usual way. An institutional
patient death record is completed following any death in a nursing home. The record
addresses issues relevant to the need to report, such as whether the death was
accidental, sudden and unexpected, and whether the family has raised concerns. The
form is then sent to the coroner’s office. Where required, the frequency of deaths to be
reported by an institution can be altered and, if there are real concerns, the institution can
be required to refer every death to the coroner. There are special requirements for deaths
in mental hospitals and developmental homes for children.
18.47 Dr Young told the Inquiry how, on one occasion, his office had a report of a higher than
normal death rate at a developmental home. A committee was set up and audited every
death which had occurred at the home over a period of five years. This revealed a pattern
of withdrawal of medical treatment, leading to death, which could not have been detected
in connection with any single death. The coroner’s office will carry out similar exercises in
relation to a doctor about whom there is concern.
467
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
18.48 Deaths caused or contributed to by medical negligence or malpractice fall within the
category of reportable deaths. Hospitals are encouraged to err on the side of overreporting
deaths. Dr Young expressed the view that, if deaths where there was an issue
about medical care were not reported, this only produced problems in the future.
Hospitals within the province have an audit system in place to assess whether or not a
death should be reported to the coroner. Often, nursing staff report deaths. Dr Young
observed that they tended to be more reliable than doctors in reporting deaths to his
office.
18.49 A doctor unsure as to whether or not a death should be reported may contact the coroner.
In a straightforward case, the coroner may be happy to allow the doctor to certify the cause
of death. However, Dr Young made the point that, once an investigative coroner has
invested a certain amount of time in a case, it is in his/her financial interests to take the
case on, because of the case-by-case basis by which coroners are paid. Coroners are
contacted via ‘dispatchers’ who act as coroner’s clerks or intermediaries. The dispatchers
are experienced and will be able to answer questions from doctors about, for example,
the content of statutory provisions. However, they will not be expected to exercise
judgement as to whether or not a death will be accepted by the coroner. Such judgements
are left to the coroners themselves.
Death Investigation
18.50 Following a report of a death, investigating coroners are instructed to attend the scene of
death unless there is good reason for not doing so. An investigating coroner should
complete a certificate, confirming that s/he has legally seized the body. Investigating
coroners are instructed to consider the worst possibility (or ‘think dirty’) and to liaise with
the family in investigating the death. The investigating coroner undertakes and directs a
medical investigation and, in a case where there is no suggestion of criminal involvement,
will interview witnesses, often in the presence of the police. Extensive written guidance is
provided for the investigating coroner. Where there is a hint of criminal involvement, the
police take over the investigation, so as to avoid the risk of an investigating coroner tainting
the criminal investigation. However, even in such cases, the coroner’s office works closely
with the police and will provide the necessary medical expertise.
18.51 If the coroner is minded not to require an autopsy, s/he will undertake a full external
examination of the body in situ to ensure that there are no signs of violence. When such
an examination is carried out at a person’s home, relatives are asked to leave the room
and experience has shown that families do not object to such an examination being
carried out. There is a practical benefit to families in that, if it is decided that an autopsy
is not required, then the body can be released to a funeral home, allowing the relatives to
make arrangements for the funeral. The scene, and the body, may be photographed. The
coroner has power to seize any evidence necessary for the purposes of his/her
investigation.
18.52 The delivery of forensic pathology is controlled by the Chief Coroner. When a decision is
taken that an autopsy is required, the investigating and regional coroners will consider
what level of pathology expertise is necessary. Local facilities are available for
468
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
straightforward cases and, where greater expertise is required, the body is transported to
one of the larger regional centres. If necessary, a case can be referred to one of the major
centres, such as Toronto or Ottawa, where forensic pathology services are available. In
some circumstances, where the circumstances of death are clear, a thorough external
examination takes the place of an invasive autopsy, although the use of this technique is
restricted to the larger forensic centres. Medical records are obtained in every case which
involves a medical issue or where an autopsy is to be performed. The relevant sections of
the medical record are photocopied and forwarded with the body to the mortuary.
18.53 Under the Coroners Act, certain defined categories of family member are entitled to
information relating to the investigation of a death. A report will be made available to the
family, but will not become a public document. If no inquest or regional review (see
18.57–18.59 below) is carried out, there is usually an opportunity for the family to discuss
with the coroner any issues relating to the death.
Public Investigation of Death
18.54 The number of inquests held in Ontario each year is low in comparison with England and
Wales. The aim of the system is to hold a small number of representative inquests which
examine issues in detail, as opposed to a larger number of routine inquests, which allow
for only superficial examination of the issues and give limited scope for learning lessons
in public safety. The statute allows for one inquest to be held into a number of deaths
where they have arisen from the same event or from a common cause. Inquests are
mandatory in certain categories of case, for example, deaths in custody and construction
and mining deaths. Discretionary inquests are held when the public interest requires it. In
2002, there were 54 mandatory inquests, together with 18 discretionary inquests.
Included in the statutory list of considerations taken into account when determining
whether or not the public interest would be served by the holding of an inquest, is the
likelihood that ‘recommendations directed to the avoidance of death in similar
circumstances’ will arise out of the proceedings. Recommendations, typically
numbering between 1200 and 1500 each year, are made following both mandatory and
discretionary inquests. The public have a right of challenge against a decision not to hold
an inquest. Such a challenge is determined by a Government Minister.
18.55 Inquests in Ontario are presided over by coroners, who do not have formal legal
qualifications. The category of coroner that can sit on an inquest is limited to the Chief
Coroner, his three deputies, the ten regional supervising coroners and 50 of the most
experienced investigating coroners. The more senior members of that group conduct
inquests in the most complex cases. Some limited legal training is provided and a detailed
inquest manual is provided to assist the coroners while acting in their judicial capacity.
Crown attorneys are appointed to act as counsel to the coroner at the inquest hearings
and interested parties are often represented by lawyers.
18.56 Juries sit on all inquests and are responsible for reaching a verdict and making
recommendations in the light of the evidence and submissions from interested parties. In
many cases, the submissions will include suggested recommendations, which can be
adopted in full or in part and supplemented by the juries’ own recommendations. The
469
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
coroner then produces a letter of explanation, setting out the circumstances of death, the
procedural history of the inquest, his/her interpretation of the significant parts of the
evidence and the jury’s rationale for making each of its recommendations. The letter is
intended to supplement, not replace, the verdict of the jury.
18.57 In more complex cases, detailed reviews will be undertaken by standing committees of
experts. These include an Anaesthetic Death Review Committee, a Paediatric Death
Review Committee, an Obstetrical Care Review Committee and a Geriatric and Long Term
Care Review Committee. The committees are chaired by deputy chief or regional coroners
and their members are, in general, experts in the field concerned. The Paediatric Death
Review Committee has a particularly diverse membership, reflecting the complexity of the
topic. The committees review cases at the request of the Chief Coroner.
18.58 In medical cases, the committees usually look at the hospital notes, the autopsy results
and the coroner’s investigation to date. One member of the committee will conduct an
initial review and the case is then discussed with the whole membership of the committee.
A preliminary opinion and set of concerns are formulated and passed on to the regional
and investigating coroners. No formal witness statements are taken at that stage.
18.59 The review is often followed by a meeting between the review committee, the regional
coroner and the institution and doctors, or other professionals, involved in the case. A
detailed discussion (‘a regional review’) takes place and this will frequently result in a set
of recommendations being agreed. The family is then informed of the results of the review
and a decision taken as to whether the case needs to proceed to a public inquest. If such
an inquest is thought necessary, the committee member who reviewed the case first is
usually retained as an expert witness for the inquest.
18.60 The advantage of the review committee system is its ability to examine complicated
subject matter in a relatively informal manner, more efficiently than the inquest process.
Thus, effective recommendations for improvement to systems can be made expeditiously.
Dr Young said that the success of the review system was such that hospitals would
sometimes report deaths themselves and ask that a review be undertaken, knowing that
it would result in useful recommendations.
18.61 The coroner is under a statutory duty to forward recommendations to any organisation
whose failures may have caused or contributed to the death. There is no legal obligation
on the organisation to respond. However, in practice, a report is forwarded to the coroner
about 12 months later, describing the steps taken to implement the recommended steps.
The report is made public and failure to take appropriate preventative measures will
receive widespread critical coverage in the press.
Registration
18.62 The practical aspects of registration are carried out by the funeral director. The certificate
of the cause of death, or the coroner’s death certificate in cases where the coroner has
become involved, is taken to the funeral home. The family will complete a request for burial
at the funeral home and the funeral director will take the forms (together with the cremation
certificate if relevant) to the registrar, who will register the death. A short form death
470
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
certificate is available for administrative purposes. This does not include any details of the
circumstances of death or cause of death.
Cremation
18.63 The authorisation of the coroner is required for cremation. Before authorising cremation,
the investigating coroner will attend at the funeral home and review the relevant
documentation, including the certificate of cause of death and a form filled out by the
family. He or she will speak to the funeral director and enquire whether there are any
problems associated with the death. The investigating coroner will rarely examine the
body.
Coroners Information System
18.64 Data about deaths is entered into the coroners information system by the local
investigating coroner and is subsequently checked by personnel at the offices of the
regional coroner and Chief Coroner. The information is used for research projects into
public safety issues, such as drinking and driving, or drownings. A Canada-wide
database is currently being built which will facilitate the collection of statistical data on the
circumstances of deaths.
Detecting Shipman
18.65 On the basis of the summaries describing the circumstances of four of Shipman’s unlawful
killings, Dr Young expressed the view that there was some prospect that Shipman’s
activities would have been detected by the Ontario system. For example, the sudden and
unexpected nature of Mrs Grundy’s death would probably have caused the friends who
discovered her body to contact the police, who in turn would have called the coroner. The
investigating coroner, if following procedures correctly, would have spoken to
Mrs Grundy’s daughter. She would undoubtedly have expressed surprise at the sudden
nature of the death. It is most likely that an autopsy would have been ordered with
histology. If the cause of death had not been established at autopsy, toxicology would
have been ordered. In any event, a blood sample would have been taken, frozen and kept
for five years. ‘Old age’ is not, according to Dr Young, a cause of death which is usually
accepted in Ontario. He said that the issue of whether or not the case would have come
to the coroner would probably have depended upon the level of concern felt and
expressed by the family.
Comments
18.66 Dr Young expressed the view that the best way of ensuring that the coroner service
learned of all relevant deaths was to ensure that it had a high public profile and to make
the public aware that there was a mechanism for reporting suspicious deaths. I agree that
it is vital that the public has a high degree of awareness of the coroner service, together
with the confidence to approach the service in the event of concern.
18.67 It is evident to me that the Ontario coroner service has strong leadership, together with a
positive philosophy, which enables it to meet the practical difficulties presented by the
471
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
state’s geography and climate. The high element of medical expertise available to the
service is plainly a strength, as is the emphasis (similar to that in Victoria) on public safety
issues and the benefits of learning from deaths which have occurred in the past. I shall
suggest that in England and Wales, deaths should be selected for inquest, as in Ontario,
on the basis of public interest, with particular emphasis on the prevention of death and
injury in future.
18.68 I also regard as extremely significant the ethos that encourages all concerned to have a
high index of suspicion when viewing the circumstances of any particular death. It is
essential, if any system of death investigation is to work, that the personnel employed
within the system do not approach their task on the assumption that all will be well. If they
do, there is a real risk (exemplified by the Shipman case) that they will fail to detect
problems which are there to be seen.
18.69 I was impressed by the robustness of some of the investigative methods, such as
attendance at the scene of the death, the taking of photographs and the taking and
preservation of blood samples.
18.70 I was particularly interested in the system by which medical mishaps are investigated,
using the services of standing committees of experts. It seems to me that this type of
system might well be adopted in England and Wales. It would complement the
identification and investigation methods being developed in Victoria, which I also found
interesting.
18.71 I think it highly desirable that England and Wales, like Ontario and Australia, should have
a computerised information system.
The System in Maryland, USA
18.72 Dr David Fowler, Chief Medical Examiner, attended the seminars and described the
system in Maryland.
Background and Structure
18.73 The organisation of post-death procedures differs from state to state in the USA. Some
states, including Maryland, have a medical examiner system, others have a coroner
system and some hybrid arrangements exist. Maryland is a state with areas of high and
low population density. The overall population is 5.7 million. Around 10,000 deaths are
referred to the medical examiner each year, which represents just less than 25% of all
deaths. Investigations are carried out in about 8000 cases and autopsies are performed
in about half of those cases. Toxicology is performed in almost every case where an
autopsy is performed, as well as in a small number of other cases.
18.74 The medical examiner system is controlled and operated by the Post Mortem Examiners
Commission (‘the Commission’), which is a statutory body established to ensure
independence from the state. On the Commission sit the Heads of Pathology from each
of the major teaching hospitals in the state, the Superintendent of the State Police, the
Commissioner of Health for Baltimore City and the Secretary of Health for Maryland.
472
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
The Commission therefore comprises representatives from the spheres of academic
pathology, law enforcement and public health. The Commission takes all operational
decisions and deals with staffing issues. In Baltimore, death investigations are run from
the central Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME). Based at the OCME are the Chief
Medical Examiner, his two deputies, seven assistant medical examiners, ten forensic
pathologists, and 14 full-time investigators, together with support staff, including seven
toxicologists. All autopsies in the state are carried out at the OCME.
18.75 The full-time death investigators investigate deaths that occur within Baltimore City. In the
outlying counties, deputy medical examiners, who work on a part-time basis, have
responsibility for the control and review of the provision of local services. Individual deaths
are investigated in the first instance by part-time forensic investigators, who report to the
deputy medical examiners. Forensic investigators usually have a paramedic background
and their training includes forensic medicine, anatomy, physiology and interview
techniques. Employed paramedics often work as part-time forensic investigators by way
of secondary employment. The medical examiner system provides cover 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
18.76 Dr Fowler has a significant educative role. He lectures law enforcement agencies about
the work of the medical examiner system. As part of his/her training, every police recruit
in Maryland receives lectures from staff from the OCME and will visit the OCME. They also
receive continuing education.
Statutory Framework
18.77 The statutory framework is operated on a state, not a federal, level. In Maryland, the main
statute regulating the medical examiner system is the Health-General Article. Title 5 of the
statute establishes the Commission and also defines its composition, powers and duties.
The statute defines cases to be examined by the OCME and authorises the Commission
to issue guidelines on the categories of reportable cases. The statute also covers autopsy
procedures, forensic investigation, record keeping and death certification.
Objectives
18.78 The system in Maryland has an emphasis on law enforcement issues. Police recruits are
told to report every death that is not ‘solely’ and ‘exclusively’ due to natural causes. They
are told that ‘solely’ and ‘exclusively’ are not negotiable terms. They are encouraged to
approach deaths with a high index of suspicion, keeping in mind the possibility that there
may be suspicious circumstances. Medical investigations carried out within the medical
examiner system support the work of the police. The service works in very close
co-operation with the police.
18.79 Dr Fowler stressed that the objective of the system was purely to discover the cause of
death, not the circumstances.
18.80 There is a high public awareness of the OCME and the work of the Chief Medical Examiner
is widely publicised in the press.
473
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Deaths Not Reported to the OCME
18.81 In practice, most deaths occurring outside a hospital or hospice are referred to the
medical examiner. It is rare for a doctor to attend the home of a living patient in Maryland
and, if a person dies at home, it is unlikely that a doctor will attend in the first instance. It
is more likely that the emergency services will be summoned to the death and will contact
the OCME. If a doctor is contacted first, s/he is likely to advise the caller to contact the
emergency services.
18.82 Only doctors licensed to practise in Maryland are able to certify the cause of death and,
because obtaining a licence is a relatively expensive process, very few junior doctors
have such a licence. There is no set period within which a doctor must have seen a patient
in order to certify the cause of death. Doctors will rarely certify a home death. Indeed, the
problem in Maryland is in persuading doctors that they are able to certify the cause of
death, rather than restraining them from doing so. Dr Fowler explained that this was largely
because of concern about medico-legal issues which might arise from an inaccurate
certification of the cause of death.
18.83 Registration of the death is done by the funeral home. The death certificate must be filed
with the Vital Records Department. No personal attendance by the family is required.
18.84 Although only certain categories of death must be reported to the medical examiner in the
first instance, an audit of deaths not reported to the OCME is undertaken by the Vital
Records Department. A process of screening of death certificates is in place, checking
for proscribed words in the certified cause of death. A list of proscribed terms is drawn up
by the OCME and, if terms from that list appear on a death certificate, the Vital Records
Department forwards the death certificate to the OCME for further investigation. Each
year, around 2000 death certificates are referred to the OCME by the Vital Records
Department in this way.
Deaths Reported to the OCME
18.85 The Chief Medical Examiner’s jurisdiction is limited to ‘reportable deaths’ and does not
extend to all deaths within the geographical jurisdiction. There is a long list of reportable
deaths. This list includes, for example, categories such as death due to violence or
suicide, and deaths which are sudden and unexpected, deaths which are ‘unusual’ and
deaths which occurred ‘suddenly while in apparent good health’. There is a statutory
duty on all doctors, funeral directors and any other person who believes a death is
suspicious, or has occurred in unusual circumstances, to report the death to the police
who, in turn, report the death to the OCME.
18.86 When a death is reported to the OCME, a decision is taken as to whether or not jurisdiction
is to be accepted. In a case which does not obviously fall within the medical examiner’s
jurisdiction, discussion will take place between the deceased’s doctor and, in the first
instance, a forensic investigator. Ultimately, a medical examiner will discuss the case with
the doctor and determine whether or not the death should be the subject of an
investigation. Jurisdiction is accepted in approximately four out of every five cases that
are referred.
474
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
Death Investigation
18.87 When jurisdiction over a death is accepted, a variety of investigative steps can be taken.
These steps are set out in a series of detailed protocols. In the first instance, a forensic
investigator will go to the scene to inspect the body and undertake an investigation as to
the circumstances of the death. Forensic investigators have a comprehensive manual
which directs the investigation at the scene. Members of the family and other witnesses
are interviewed. The body will be examined thoroughly and photographs taken. In an
appropriate case, the body is released to the family, so that it can be taken to a funeral
home. The permission of the medical examiner is required in order to remove a body from
the scene of death. This will be given only in a case where no further investigation is
required. Where it is not possible to examine the body at the scene, or the deceased’s
relatives object to the examination, the body will be removed and taken to the mortuary
for detailed external examination or autopsy. Where there is some doubt on the part of the
forensic investigator, s/he will consult the medical examiner as to the future conduct of the
investigation. In some cases, a blood sample will be taken for future toxicological
investigation. The OCME encourages the police to carry out as much of the investigation
as possible, even in cases where no criminality is suspected. Often, the scene
investigation is carried out in company with the police. This results in some duplication of
resources. However, Dr Fowler said that it provided a valuable safeguard and that he
found the team approach between the medical examiner service and the law enforcement
agencies to be most effective.
18.88 An investigation report is completed by the forensic investigator, providing details of the
scene, what is known about the circumstances of the death and the medical history. If the
body has to be transported by the funeral director, s/he must have a copy of that report,
together with the death certificate, with him/her whilst transporting the body. On the basis
of that report, the medical examiner will then either certify the cause of death or order that
an autopsy be carried out. If an autopsy is not to be carried out, the investigation report
will also be reviewed by a fellow in forensic pathology, who is someone with at least five
years’ pathology training. It will then be reviewed separately by a chief investigator.
Finally, the medical examiner will have an opportunity to review the case before deciding
whether or not to certify the cause or whether further investigation is required.
18.89 Outside Baltimore, if a forensic investigator decides that a case does not require autopsy,
s/he will telephone a forensic investigator at the OCME to discuss the case and the two of
them may well have a conference call with the on-call medical examiner. If it is determined
that the body should not undergo autopsy and is to be released to a funeral home, the
investigation report is sent to a deputy medical examiner at county level who will sign the
death certificate. If that deputy is not satisfied that s/he is able properly to certify the cause
of death in the absence of an autopsy, s/he will telephone the Chief Medical Examiner or
one of the two deputy chief medical examiners and request arbitration. In any event, prior
to disposal, one of the two deputy chief medical examiners, or one of the two most senior
forensic pathologists, will review such cases on paper.
18.90 One category of case is dealt with differently, by a process called ‘approval’. Where a
deceased person had been in hospital for an extended period prior to death, in a case
475
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
which would otherwise be reportable to the medical examiner (e.g. in the case of a driver
in a single-vehicle collision with a bridge who had died from his injuries), the case might
well be suitable for approval. The reasoning behind the process is to avoid carrying out
an autopsy in circumstances where the injuries are well identified during life. The death
certificate is signed by the hospital doctor and approved by the medical examiner who will
have had sight of the deceased’s medical records.
18.91 The decision as to whether or not an autopsy is to be carried out is made in the first
instance by the medical examiner. The deceased’s family has a right to challenge the
decision to carry out an autopsy. Such a challenge is typically made on four or five
occasions each year, usually on grounds of religion. Discussions take place to see if the
autopsy can be avoided altogether or steps can be taken to remove or minimise the
objection to the autopsy. If the objection cannot be met and it is still proposed to carry out
an autopsy, there is a right to challenge a decision before a judge, whose ruling is final.
18.92 Prior to an autopsy being carried out at the OCME, the salient points of the history are
discussed by a group of pathologists and trainee pathologists, who convene at the OCME
each morning. The autopsies are then performed and the meeting reconvened in the
afternoon, when the autopsy findings are presented to the entire pathology staff and the
cause of death is discussed. Partial autopsies are rarely carried out.
18.93 Toxicology is carried out in virtually every case where an autopsy is performed, as well as
every case where the body is taken to the OCME for external examination. Toxicology is
also taken in some cases which do not reach the OCME; forensic investigators have
toxicology kits available to them and, if directed to do so by the medical examiner, can
obtain a sample of blood at the scene which is sent to the toxicology laboratory at the
OCME for screening. Around 200 samples are sent in from the counties and tested in this
way each year. Having a toxicological laboratory at the OCME means that results are
available very quickly. The fact that toxicology is performed in a relatively large number of
cases reduces the cost of the testing in an individual case and also has demonstrated the
implication of drugs in a number of deaths in which it had not been suspected. After the
seminars, Dr Fowler provided the Inquiry with details of a number of cases where drugs
had been found in babies, young children and the very elderly. In one of those cases, that
of a 91 year old woman who died in a nursing home, the death was found to have resulted
from homicide.
18.94 The medical examiner will examine a death retrospectively, if a concern arises, for
example, about a particular nursing home or physician. Dr Fowler said there was no
reason why a medical examiner should not investigate certain categories of death
prospectively also.
Judicial Investigation of Death
18.95 There is no such thing as an inquest under the Maryland system. Findings of fact as to the
circumstances of death are not made, just findings as to the cause of death. Medical
examiners have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits as part of the
investigative process, but they do not have the ability to subpoena witnesses. An
expression of opinion is given at the end of the autopsy report, which includes comment
476
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
about the circumstances of death. However, although the opinion is expressed in good
faith, it holds no legal status and, in subsequent criminal or civil litigation, is commonly
redacted out of the report. An interested person can seek a review of the cause of death,
as found by the medical examiner. The review is carried out by the Chief Medical
Examiner, and is itself subject to review by an administrative judge and, thereafter, there
is a final right of appeal to a circuit court judge.
18.96 With deaths relating to medical care, the medical examiner will gather all relevant
information and obtain expert specialist advice on the case. That information is then
passed to the Board of Physician Quality Assurance, which is the body responsible for
monitoring the standard of care given by doctors.
18.97 Although there is no formal judicial investigation of death, information obtained during the
course of the medical investigation is harnessed for the purpose of improving public
safety and passed on to a number of relevant bodies, usually the local health officer who
is responsible for injury prevention and community health. Industrial accidents are
investigated, not only by the OCME, but also by the occupational safety administration.
The OCME contributes information to a national clearing house for information relating to
product failures.
Cremation
18.98 The same standards of investigation and the same procedures apply, regardless of the
method of disposal. Cremation is used much less than burial as a means of disposal in
Maryland.
Detecting Shipman
18.99 On the basis of the summaries describing the circumstances of four of Shipman’s unlawful
killings, Dr Fowler formed the view that Shipman’s activities would have been detected by
the Maryland system. In relation to the case of Mrs Grundy, he said that, as hers was a
death at home discovered by friends, it is likely that the emergency services would have
been summoned and the OCME would have been informed of the death. Unless a medical
history to support a cause of death had been established, the medical examiner would
have ordered that an autopsy be carried out, which would automatically have included
toxicological testing. If no autopsy had been carried out, there would have been an
external examination together with toxicology. Prior to the hearings, Dr Fowler put the
summaries in the four cases to his two deputy chief medical examiners and seven
assistant medical examiners. In relation to three of the cases, all nine would have ordered
an autopsy and, in relation to the fourth, seven out of nine said they would have done so.
‘Old age’ is not an acceptable cause of death in Maryland and would be rejected by the
Vital Records Department. Even had the death not otherwise come to the attention of the
OCME earlier, it would have been referred to the OCME as part of the routine screening
process of death certificates. However, this might not have been done until after disposal
of the body.
477
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
Comments
18.100 The systems for death investigation in Maryland appear highly developed and extremely
robust. The level of training of forensic investigators is high. The Inquiry was told that, as
in Ontario, their philosophy is to approach deaths critically and with a degree of suspicion.
The forensic investigation of the circumstances of death runs in tandem with the medical
investigation. The use of external examinations and toxicology, both alone and in
combination, constitutes a valuable investigative tool.
18.101 I noted with interest the views of Dr Fowler and his staff that the Maryland system would
have detected Shipman. However, this is at least in part due to the fact that doctors do not
visit patients at home in Maryland, that the emergency services are likely to be summoned
to any death at home and that such deaths are highly likely to be reported to the medical
examiner. I can see that once that happens, the investigation is so robust that detection
of wrongdoing is highly likely. I consider that those responsible for setting up the new
systems of death investigation in England and Wales could learn much from studying the
methods used in Maryland. I was particularly interested in the use made of toxicology.
18.102 Another strength of this system appears to be its highly developed procedures for audit
and quality assurance.
The System in Finland
18.103 Professor Antti Sajantila, Professor of Forensic Biology, Deputy Head of the Division of
Forensic Pathology and Director of the Laboratory of Forensic Biology at the Department
of Forensic Medicine, University of Helsinki, attended the seminars and described the
system in Finland.
Background and Structure
18.104 Finland has a medical examiner system and there are 13 medical examiners spread over
the whole of Finland, six of whom are based in the largest province of South Finland. The
population of South Finland is around 1.4 million. About 10,000 deaths occur in the
province each year and forensic autopsies are performed in about a quarter of those
cases.
18.105 Those involved in the certification of death are provided with extensive training. All
medical students are required to undertake modules in forensic medicine and the
completion of death certificates. The module consists of 22 hours of small group teaching
on the completion of death certificates and external examination of the body. As part of
university final examinations, medical students are required to complete five death
certificates on the basis of hypothetical medical histories and information as to the
circumstances of death. All students attend five forensic autopsies and specialist
seminars on forensic pathology. In order to become a forensic pathologist, further
comprehensive post-graduate training is undertaken in forensic pathology, clinical
forensic medicine and clinical histopathology.
478
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
18.106 In South Finland, most of the medical examiners are based at the Department of Forensic
Medicine at the University of Helsinki. The medical examiners have the same training as
forensic pathologists and check all death certificates. They also have responsibility for
educating doctors in medico-legal matters. Certain academic staff from the university
forensic medicine departments are accredited to carry out forensic autopsies. Toxicology
services in Finland are centralised and all toxicological testing is done at the University of
Helsinki. Testing is carried out in 5000 cases each year, in addition to some limited
biochemical analysis.
Statutory Framework
18.107 Statutes 1973/459 and 1973/948 specify the circumstances in which police, medical
examiners and forensic teams are required to investigate deaths. In addition, separate
regulations relating to the notification of death and burial of the deceased, payment of
costs associated with certification and autopsy, disclosure of information and other
provisions relating to autopsy and forensic examination are contained within statutes
1991/114, 1992/1131, 1997/858 and 1998/99.
Objectives
18.108 Death certification is considered to be an important aspect of medical practice in Finland.
The aim of the system is to form as accurate and detailed information as possible about
the cause of death, in order to inform future public health policy. Emphasis is placed on
the importance of ascertaining the cause of natural, as well as unnatural, deaths and on
the importance of the accurate death certificate to society, as well as to members of the
deceased’s family.
Preliminary Death Investigation
18.109 There is a duty on every person in Finland to report, to either a doctor or a police officer, the
fact that a death has occurred. A police officer attending at a scene of death will summon a
doctor from the public healthcare centre or a police surgeon. In some cases, the doctor
will be able to certify the cause of death without the need to refer the death to the medical
examiner or the need for further medical or police investigation. If further investigation is
required, two types of investigation can be pursued. The first is a medical investigation as
to the cause of death, which will not involve the medical examiner or the police. The
second is a forensic, or medico-legal investigation, into the cause of death, which will be
ordered in any case that is ‘reportable’ to the medical examiner. The medical examiner has
no investigative role in respect of the factual circumstances surrounding the death and
such investigations are carried out by the police.
Deaths Not Reported to the Medical Examiner and Not Investigated by the Police
18.110 If a doctor is able to certify the cause of death without further medical investigation, s/he
will complete a death certificate, certifying the cause and manner of death. The Finnish
death certificate is comprehensive and contains a considerable amount of information.
The deceased’s personal details are recorded, together with the certified causes of death.
479
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
The cause of death is then classified into one of eight categories (disease, occupational
disease, accident, medical treatment or investigative procedure, suicide, homicide, war
or ‘obscure’). Further classification is required in the case of an accident. A question is
then asked as to whether, in the four weeks prior to death, anything more than a minor
medical procedure has been carried out. There is then a large section of the form in which
the doctor provides a narrative as to the circumstances of death, including the health of
the deceased prior to the immediate events leading up to death, essential test results and
treatment, and a detailed description of any injury or poisoning linked to the death.
18.111 The signing of a death certificate is taken very seriously in Finland and is seen as
analogous to giving evidence under oath in court. In order to complete the form properly,
it is necessary for the certifying doctor to make enquiries of relatives and carers and to
read the deceased’s medical records. Professor Sajantila was unaware of any complaints
or problems arising out of the comprehensive nature of the death certificate or the amount
of time taken to make investigations and complete each certificate. The Inquiry has seen
examples of completed death certificates from Finland and they provide an excellent
account of the medical events leading up to death. They are usually completed in typed
form. Most certificates are filed within the recommended period of three months from the
death and, if no autopsy is required, are generally completed within a few days of death.
18.112 The certifying doctor authorises disposal, then forwards the completed death certificate
to the population register centre in order for the death to be registered. The families of
deceased persons are entitled to see the death certificate. If not satisfied, they can report
the death to the Bureau of Medico-Legal Affairs, which will then refer it to the medical
examiner.
18.113 Where a doctor is satisfied that a death is natural, but requires further investigation in order
to determine the precise cause of death, s/he can request that a clinical autopsy be
performed. The permission of the next of kin is required in order for a clinical autopsy to be
carried out, unless the deceased consented during life to the carrying out of the autopsy.
Permission can also be obtained from the medical examiner. A clinical autopsy is carried
out by a clinical pathologist or a histopathologist (as opposed to a forensic pathologist),
on behalf of the clinician, to enable the clinician to certify the cause of death. The cause
of death is not certified by the pathologist, in contrast to the position following a forensic
autopsy. Although the clinical autopsy is a full invasive autopsy, toxicological analysis is
almost never carried out. If, during a clinical autopsy, there is any indication for a medicolegal
investigation, the pathologist will contact the police and a forensic investigation will
be ordered.
18.114 Although not all deaths are reported to the medical examiner in the first instance, death
certificates are audited by the medical examiner, who checks the certificate in every case.
In addition, Statistics Finland, the body responsible for collecting mortality statistics,
carries out an administrative check of all death certificates. If defects (e.g. relating to the
coding of the cause of death) are found in a death certificate, this may be brought to the
attention of the certifying doctor.
Deaths Reported to the Medical Examiner and Investigated by the Police
18.115 Certain categories of death are reportable to the medical examiner and fall to be
investigated by the police. The police are under a statutory duty to investigate any death
480
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
that is not caused by illness, or where the deceased was not attended by a doctor during
his/her last illness, together with those caused by crime, accident, suicide, poisoning, etc.
and those caused by occupational disease. Although the medical examiner’s jurisdiction
is strictly limited to ‘reportable deaths’, s/he can ask for all deaths of a certain category (for
example, from a particular nursing home) to be investigated and referred to him/her. The
police investigate the death and, as part of the investigation, may instruct a forensic
pathologist to perform an external examination or an autopsy. Although the decision
whether or not to request an autopsy is for the police, they will be guided by the pathologist
in reaching their decision. The family does not have the right to challenge the decision
taken by the police to carry out a forensic autopsy.
18.116 In an appropriate case, the pathologist will certify the cause and manner of death on the
basis of an external examination, together with the information contained in the police
report and the deceased’s medical records. Otherwise, a forensic pathologist will perform
a full autopsy. If necessary, the pathologist can request that further investigative steps be
taken by the police, for example that further medical records be obtained or that
photographs of the scene of death be taken.
18.117 The body is released to the family for disposal soon after autopsy, commonly on the same
day. The pathologist will inform the population register centre of the death and provide a
preliminary autopsy report. Then, usually within a period of three months, the pathologist
will produce a full autopsy report, a death certificate and a final written statement. A death
certificate provided by one pathologist will be checked by a second pathologist.
18.118 Toxicology is not automatically ordered in the case of every forensic investigation and a
decision as to whether toxicology will be ordered is generally taken following the autopsy.
Professor Sajantila orders some form of toxicology in around 80–90% of the forensic
autopsies he undertakes. The relatively extensive toxicological testing undertaken in
Finland has produced unexpected results and demonstrated otherwise unsuspected
links between deaths and alcohol, illicit drugs and even medically prescribed drugs.
Judicial Investigation of Death
18.119 Although information gathered in forensic and medical investigations is passed on to
various government institutions and organisations, the medical examiner does not hold
any judicial hearing into the circumstances of a death and will not make any formal
recommendations in the interests of public safety.
Cremation
18.120 There is no distinction in the investigative and procedural requirements according to the
method of disposal, and bodies to be disposed of by way of cremation are dealt with in
exactly the same way as bodies disposed of by way of burial.
Detecting Shipman
18.121 Professor Sajantila commented on the summaries describing the circumstances of four of
Shipman’s unlawful killings. In relation to the case of Mrs Grundy, he said that, in Finland,
481
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
a forensic investigation should have been ordered because she had led an active life, was
not known to suffer from any terminal or life-threatening illness and her death would have
had to be regarded as sudden. If a forensic autopsy had been carried out, histology would
have been ordered as a matter of course and, although the decision to order toxicology
would have depended on the findings of the autopsy, there is extensive use of
toxicological testing, which would probably have been carried out. However, before a
forensic investigation was ordered, it would have been necessary for the death to have
come to the attention of the police. Mrs Grundy’s case was reported to the police.
However, my understanding of Professor Sajantila’s evidence was that, if Shipman had
been able to provide a plausible explanation for the death then, even if the police had
become involved, they would not have initiated a forensic examination. This is because of
what Professor Sajantila described as a natural tendency on the part of police officers to
trust the opinion of a doctor. He thought that it would only be in an extreme case that the
police officer would challenge the opinion of a doctor. ‘Old age’ would be an unacceptable
cause of death. If certified, it would have been picked up by the medical examiner or
Statistics Finland during routine review of the death certificate. However, as Professor
Sajantila pointed out in his written evidence, in most cases the body will have been
disposed of by the time the check is carried out.
Comments
18.122 The most impressive aspect of the Finnish system of death certification was the emphasis
on the importance of accurately ascertaining the cause of death, even where the death
was apparently natural. This is of considerable significance, not only for the deceased’s
family, but also for society generally; it has significant implications for public health. The
importance accorded to death certification is demonstrated by the attention paid to the
topic of forensic medicine in the training of the medical profession in Finland and in the
continuing education offered.
18.123 I was particularly interested in the design of the Finnish death certificate and the detail with
which the examples I saw had been completed. This brought home to me how useful a
careful summary of the medical history and chain of events leading to death would be for
certification or investigation.
The System in Scotland
18.124 Ms Elizabeth Anne Paton, Procurator Fiscal Principal Depute, Crown Office and
Procurator Fiscal Service, Edinburgh, attended the seminar and described the system in
Scotland.
Background and Structure
18.125 The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service (COPFS) is a Department within the
Scottish Executive, headed by the Lord Advocate, assisted by the Solicitor-General, and
is responsible for independent public prosecution and deaths investigation in Scotland.
The COPFS headquarters are based at the Crown Office, in Edinburgh. The Procurator
Fiscal Service is divided into 11 areas and the boundaries conform as closely as possible
482
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
to the boundaries of the Scottish police forces. Those 11 areas are divided further into a
total of 49 districts. In larger districts, the district procurator fiscal is assisted by a
procurator fiscal depute. Both are legally qualified. The Lord Advocate and SolicitorGeneral
are assisted by Crown counsel, who are senior members of the Scottish legal
profession, seconded to the Department for a period of about three years. Crown counsel
prosecute in the High Court and review and advise on individual cases dealt with by the
procurator fiscal.
18.126 In Edinburgh, the Crown Office has a deaths department, with a Procurator Fiscal and a
Procurator Fiscal Depute (Ms Paton), who are assisted by a part-time member of the legal
staff, an administrator and a secretary. Approximately 2000 deaths are reported in the
Edinburgh district each year and autopsies are carried out on approximately half that
number. Although the Procurator Fiscal directs investigations, s/he does so with police
assistance, particularly in the undertaking of preliminary enquiries, which enables the
Procurator Fiscal to take decisions as to the future conduct of an investigation. The
Edinburgh police force has a dedicated team of inquiry officers. However, outside
Edinburgh, preliminary investigations are undertaken by all police officers.
Statutory Framework
18.127 The Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths Inquiry (Scotland) Act 1976 defines the statutory
duties of the procurator fiscal in respect of the investigation of deaths. The Registration of
Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1965 provides a statutory framework for the
registration of deaths.
Objectives
18.128 The Scottish system bears many similarities to the system in England and Wales.
However, it focuses on the holding of a public inquiry in a case giving rise to serious public
concern.
Deaths Not Reported to the Procurator Fiscal
18.129 Only certain categories of death are reported to the procurator fiscal. In those cases where
the death is not reported, the deceased’s treating doctor certifies the cause of the death.
The certification procedure for those deaths is similar to the procedure in place in England
and Wales, in that a doctor who has treated the deceased during his/her last illness is
under an obligation to issue an MCCD. One significant difference in the Regulations is
that, under the Scottish system, there is no provision making reportable to the procurator
fiscal a death where the certifying doctor has not seen the deceased within a specified
period. There is no requirement on the doctor to examine a body after death in order to
certify the cause of death; however, Ms Paton said that good practice dictates that this
should be done.
Deaths Reported to the Procurator Fiscal
18.130 A large number of specific categories of death are reported to the procurator fiscal for
investigation, including any uncertified death. The procurator fiscal also retains a broad
483
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
discretion to examine any death where it is in the public interest for him/her to do so.
Deaths are generally reported by general practitioners, hospital doctors and the police,
and, to a lesser extent, registrars of deaths, where reportable deaths have progressed to
the stage of registration. Occasionally, reports are received from members of the public.
A telephone call from a person reporting a death will often be put through directly to the
procurator fiscal; otherwise, in the first instance, the call will be taken by an administrator
or secretary. Details of the report of death are noted on a specifically designed form,
recording administrative details as well as the history. Only a member of the legal staff is
authorised to advise a doctor to certify the cause of death. The procurator fiscal may ask
the police to verify certain factual matters before allowing a doctor to certify.
Death Investigation
18.131 In cases where a death is to be investigated, the procurator fiscal will typically instruct the
police to carry out preliminary enquiries. In some areas, dedicated police officers (or
‘inquiry officers’) are available to carry out investigations on behalf of the procurator fiscal.
The police will then submit a report, containing the deceased’s personal details,
information as to the circumstances of death and the medical history. The procurator fiscal
will then determine what further investigative steps should be taken. The precise
investigative steps will, of course, depend on the circumstances of the individual case. If
there is no certificate of cause of death, the next step is likely to be an autopsy. In most
parts of Scotland, however, the procurator fiscal would have the opportunity of a ‘view and
grant’ as an alternative to an autopsy. The Inquiry has received evidence on the ‘view and
grant’ procedure, which derives its name from the fact that a pathologist will view the
external aspects of the body, and if s/he can confidently provide a cause of death, grant
an MCCD. When carrying out the examination, the pathologist will have available to
him/her the police report and the deceased’s medical records.
18.132 Further witness statements might be taken by the procurator fiscal or a member of the
legal staff. Potential witnesses might be called in for interview to the procurator fiscal’s
office, a process known as precognition. The procurator fiscal might also meet the families
of the deceased. Medical advice might be sought from a pathologist in the first instance
and, in a case where the death is associated with medical care, an independent expert
with appropriate expertise will be instructed to review the case and prepare a report. As
in England and Wales, the investigation is directed by a lawyer, not a doctor.
18.133 In Edinburgh, autopsy services are provided under a block contract with the Department
of Forensic Medicine at the University of Edinburgh. Two full-time forensic pathologists
carry out the autopsies and are also available to provide medical advice when the need
arises. This is the only medical expertise immediately available to the procurator fiscal.
The decision to order an autopsy is made by the procurator fiscal and, although there is
no formal right on the part of the family to object to the carrying out of an autopsy, in
practice any objections made will be taken into account during the decision-making
process. The procurator fiscal will request histology or toxicology in an appropriate case
and, where the need arises, the pathologist will approach the procurator fiscal and
request permission to carry out further investigation. If there is a suspicion of criminal
involvement, the autopsy will be carried out by two pathologists. If not, a single-doctor
484
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: O Proof Round: 2
autopsy will be ordered. Following an autopsy, the pathologist prepares a report, which is
significantly more comprehensive and detailed than the equivalent report produced
following a coroner’s autopsy in England and Wales.
18.134 In the Edinburgh district, the practice is to carry out full autopsies in every case. The ‘view
and grant’ system is not available in Edinburgh. One further noteworthy exception to the
full autopsy in Scotland was the practice adopted following the murder of a number of
children at a school in Dunblane in 1996. They were shot by a gunman who went on to take
his own life. In those circumstances, and on the basis that there could be no subsequent
criminal proceedings, the murderer having taken his own life, x-ray examinations of the
bodies were taken, in place of autopsies.
18.135 The procurator fiscal is under an obligation to report certain categories of death to the
Crown Office, for Crown counsel to decide as to the future conduct of the case and as to
whether it is necessary for a prosecution to be brought or a fatal accident inquiry to be
held. If the case does not fall into one of those categories, at the conclusion of the
investigation the procurator fiscal will make an order that there be ‘no further proceedings’.
18.136 When a death is first reported to the procurator fiscal, a provisional cause of death will be
provided where possible and the registrar informed of the provisional cause. At the
conclusion of the procurator fiscal’s investigations, the registrar will either be told that the
provisional cause of death is confirmed or be informed of the amended cause. Personal
attendance for the purposes of registration is required in Scotland, as in England and
Wales.
Judicial Investigation of Death
18.137 The closest equivalent in Scotland to the inquest that is held in England and Wales is the
fatal accident inquiry. There is only a relatively small number of fatal accident inquiries
and, in the year 2001–2002, only 64 were held, out of a total of 13,625 deaths reported to
the procurator fiscal. Fatal accident inquiries are chaired by a sheriff, who is a legally
qualified judge, and the case is presented by a procurator fiscal. Fatal accident inquiries
are held in public.
18.138 Fatal accident inquiries are mandatory in the case of a death caused by an accident in the
course of employment or in the case of a death in legal custody. Fatal accident inquiries
are also held at the Lord Advocate’s discretion, which is guided by a number of principles,
including whether the death occurred in circumstances such as to give rise to serious
public concern. In the case of a discretionary inquiry, the views of the bereaved family as
to the holding of an inquiry are taken into account. Where a death is apparently caused
by a system failure, it is more likely that an inquiry will be held than if it appears to have
been caused by an individual failure. The purpose of the inquiry is to establish where and
when a death took place, the cause of the death and, in general terms, the cause of any
accident that resulted in the death. Findings will be made about any reasonable
precautions that might have prevented the death. Following a fatal accident inquiry, it is
open to the sheriff to make recommendations for the purposes of future public safety. The
recommendations are forwarded to the relevant body or organisation by the procurator
485
SHIP03$$30 25-06-03 13:45:22 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P018 Page Type: E Proof Round: 2
The Shipman Inquiry
fiscal. Although the recommendations do not have legal status, they apply political
pressure to implement changes in furtherance of public safety.
18.139 Where there is no fatal accident inquiry, no formal report or document is prepared
summarising the investigation carried out by the procurator fiscal. However, the
procurator fiscal will hold discussions with the family and, where the family is interested in
receiving further information, details of the investigation and the evidence obtained can
be provided. In addition, the autopsy report will be made available to the family. Where
appropriate, the report can be sent to a general practitioner in order for the medical
aspects of the report to be explained. Alternatively, the family will be invited to a meeting
with the procurator fiscal and a pathologist, who will explain the medical aspects of the
report.
Detecting Shipman
18.140 On the basis of summaries describing the circumstances of four of Shipman’s unlawful
killings, Ms Paton formed the view that Shipman’s activities would probably not have been
detected by the procurator fiscal system, as it is implemented in Edinburgh. In relation to
the case of Mrs Grundy, she said that ‘old age’ would have been acceptable as a cause
of death because Mrs Grundy was over 80 years of age. Although the death should have
been reported to the procurator fiscal, on the basis that it was sudden, the doctor could
have certified the cause of death without reporting it. Even if the death had come to the
attention of the procurator fiscal, depending on the precise circumstances and discussion
with the treating doctor, the procurator fiscal might well have given the treating doctor
permission to certify the cause of death. It is possible that the police would have been
instructed to undertake a preliminary investigation into the circumstances of death, but
neither the procurator fiscal nor any member of his/her staff would necessarily have made
any direct enquiries of the family.
18.141 In relation to the death of Mrs Ivy Lomas, who was unlawfully killed by Shipman on his
surgery premises, Ms Paton said that the list of reportable deaths to the procurator fiscal
had been amended in the light of Shipman’s crimes to include deaths that occur in a
general practitioner’s surgery. At the time of the death, however, the death might well not
have been brought to the attention of the procurator fiscal and, in any event, as in the case
of Mrs Grundy, the investigation would have been unlikely to have uncovered Shipman’s
unlawful activity.
Comments
18.142 The system in Scotland is similar in many respects to that in England and Wales. However,
the discretion to select for public hearing only those cases which raise issues of serious
public concern has the effect of reducing the number of cases in which a public hearing
is necessary and of ensuring that hearings are not held in cases where they can serve no
useful purpose.
18.143 I was also interested to hear about the involvement of families in the decision as to whether
or not a public hearing should take place and, in the event that no such hearing is thought
appropriate, of the arrangements made to inform the family about the deceased’s death
and its cause.
486
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: SO Proof Round:
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Proposals for Change
Introduction – the Problems Summarised
19.1 The present systems of death and cremation certification failed to detect that Shipman
had killed any of his 215 victims. Many of the deaths occurred suddenly and unexpectedly
and, under the present procedures, should have been reported to the coroner. Yet
Shipman managed to avoid any coronial investigation in all but two of the cases in which
he had killed. He did this by claiming to be in a position to certify the cause of death and
by persuading relatives that no autopsy (and therefore no referral to the coroner) was
necessary.
19.2 The present system is almost completely dependent upon the professional integrity and
competence of the medical profession. In general the profession can be relied upon, but
not always. The Shipman case has shown that the present procedures fail to protect the
public from the risk that, in certifying a death without reporting it to the coroner, a doctor
might successfully conceal homicide, medical error or neglect leading to death. It is said
by some that Shipman is unique; there will never be another like him. I hope that is so, but
other, less prolific killers have been detected in the medical profession and it is not
possible to determine how many killings or how many errors by a health professional have
gone undetected. Certification of the cause of death by a single doctor is no longer
acceptable. Cremation certification, as presently practised, is ineffective.
19.3 After many Shipman killings, relatives of the deceased were surprised and puzzled by the
sudden death of their relatives. In Tameside, as would have been the case in most parts
of the country, they were not consulted during the certification processes or given any
specific opportunity to discuss the death. They never saw the cremation Form C doctor.
They were not asked for their account of events. Those who were concerned about the
death of their relative were too diffident to contact the coroner’s office. Thus a source of
information, which might have resulted in Shipman’s detection, was not utilised. The
relatives’ concerns were unresolved. In future, the family of the deceased must play a full
part in the processes of investigation and certification.
19.4 As I have said, only two of the deaths of Shipman’s victims were investigated by the
coroner. Most of these deaths were sudden and wholly unexpected by the relatives of the
deceased. They should have been reported to the coroner but were not. For that reason
alone, it is no longer acceptable that the decision on referral should be made by a single
certifying doctor. In any event, research has shown that, even when acting honestly and
making a genuine effort to recognise a death that should be reported to the coroner, many
doctors fail to do so. Some means must be found to ensure that those deaths that require
full investigation by the coroner receive it.
19.5 In the two concealed Shipman killings investigated by the coroner, the investigation failed
to uncover the truth. Those investigations were inadequate. The Inquiry has found other
examples of poor coronial investigation. If coronial investigation is not thorough, there is a
danger that wrongdoing will go undetected. There are several possible explanations why
coroners’ investigations are not as thorough as they should be. One is that the coroner
487
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
may have insufficient time and inadequate resources to ensure that reported deaths are
properly investigated. Often the coroner does not have medical knowledge or ready
access to medical advice. He or she may therefore have an imperfect understanding of
the issues. Many coroners lack the support of trained investigators.
19.6 In short, the present systems are failing to protect the public and to meet the reasonable
expectations of society. There can be no doubt that change is needed. The changes that
I shall propose are based upon the evidence I have heard and read, the responses to the
Inquiry’s Discussion Paper and the contributions made during the seminars. At times, in
earlier Chapters of the Report, I have presaged some of my conclusions. In this Chapter,
I shall describe my proposals for change and the new system that I recommend.
The Fundamental Reviewof Death Certification and the Coroner Services
19.7 The Terms of Reference of the Fundamental Review of Death Certification and the Coroner
Services in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (‘the Coroners Review’) overlapped to
some extent with those of this Inquiry. Mr Tom Luce, Chair of the Review, has been most
helpful to the Inquiry. He provided the Inquiry with the responses to the Review’s
Consultation Paper. He agreed to make a public statement at one of the Inquiry’s
seminars, in which he outlined the Review’s current thinking on a number of issues of
common interest. Also, he has permitted me to read the Review’s Report before
publication. This has enabled me to identify those areas where the Review’s conclusions
coincide with mine and where we differ. I am pleased to report that there are many topics
on which we are in agreement. Where we do not agree, I shall take the opportunity to
explain why I differ from the Review’s proposals. I hope that this approach will be of
assistance to those whose task it will be to decide upon the form of change to be made.
19.8 It will be apparent to any reader of this Report and the Report of the Coroners Review that
I have not covered several important issues that are covered by the Review. For example,
I have not mentioned the special arrangements presently made for the certification and
registration of stillbirths and neonatal deaths. I have not discussed whether special
provision should be made for the investigation of the death of a child. I have not
considered the procedures governing the disposal of bodies brought in from overseas or
the granting of permission to remove a body for disposal overseas. I have not mentioned
Northern Ireland. I have not touched upon these subjects because they have not arisen in
my consideration of the deaths of Shipman’s patients and the operation of the systems by
which those deaths were investigated and certified. Those topics in effect fell outside the
Inquiry’s Terms of Reference.
19.9 There is one very important set of issues, covered fully by the Coroners Review, which I
shall touch upon only briefly. This is the scope and conduct of inquests. As the Report of
the Coroners Review makes plain, this is an area in which changes are necessary. I have
not delved deeply into these issues for two reasons. First, they have not been prominent
in the Inquiry’s consideration of the deaths of Shipman’s patients. No death of a victim of
Shipman’s was subject to an inquest until after his conviction. The deaths of very few of
his patients were even reported to the coroner, let alone examined at inquest. For that
reason, the Inquiry has received little evidence about inquests. The issues surrounding
488
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
the scope and conduct of inquests have arisen largely from consideration of the
responses to the Coroners Review’s Consultation Paper and the Inquiry’s own
consultation procedures. Second, as the results of the consultation have led me to form
views similar to those expressed by the Coroners Review, it seems sensible that I should
simply endorse the Review’s conclusions, rather than explain my own at any length. In
Chapter Nine (paragraph 9.76), I have listed those parts of the Coroners Review where I
am in agreement with the views expressed.
Should a Coronial System Be Retained?
19.10 In any modern society, there must be a system for the investigation of the cause and
circumstances of death. In England and Wales, for well over a century, coroners have
been at the heart of the system of death certification and investigation. Although many
deaths are certified by a single doctor, Parliament has provided that certain deaths
requiring investigation are to be reported to the coroner with a view to an inquest being
held unless the coroner decides, after an autopsy, that an inquest is not necessary. In
earlier Chapters of this Report, I have been critical of the ways in which the coronial system
operates at present. I have pointed to the poor quality of many coroners’ decisions and
the superficiality of investigation. Although I have not covered in depth the conduct of
inquests, I am aware of many criticisms of them and I observe that the Coroners Review
has concluded that they are unsatisfactory in many respects.
19.11 In the light of these deficiencies, ought I to recommend the abolition of the coronial
system? Is there any need in the system for a hearing conducted by a judicial figure?
Although some states and countries (e.g. Finland and Maryland, USA) complete death
investigation and certification without any judicial involvement, many systems incorporate
some form of judicial proceeding for the uncovering of uncertain facts. It seems to me that
the availability of some form of judicial enquiry is highly desirable, if not absolutely
essential. I think that the tradition of the coroner’s inquest is so well rooted in this country
that most members of the public would regret its loss, even though they are critical of the
way it is operated at present.
19.12 I have concluded that the coronial system should be retained. In that, I am in agreement
with the Coroners Review. However, in my view, there must be radical reform and a
complete break with the past, as to organisation, philosophy, sense of purpose and mode
of operation. The new Coroner Service that I shall recommend will be barely recognisable
as the offspring of its parent.
The Aim and Purposes of the NewCoroner Service
19.13 The aim of the Coroner Service should be to provide an independent, cohesive system of
death investigation and certification, readily accessible to and understood by the public.
For every death, it should seek to identify the deceased, to discover where, how and why
the deceased died and should provide an explanation for the death to those associated
with the deceased or having a proper interest in understanding the cause and
circumstances of the death. It should seek to ensure that all the necessary formal details
relating to the death are correctly and accurately recorded. Its procedures should be
489
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
designed to detect cases of homicide, medical error and neglect. It should seek to meet
the needs and reasonable expectations of the bereaved, including those from minority
groups who wish to dispose of their dead within a short time after the death. The Service
should also provide a thorough and open investigation of all deaths giving rise to public
concern. It should ensure that the knowledge gained and lessons learned from death
investigation are applied for the prevention of avoidable death and injury. It should provide
accurate information about causes of death for the purpose of maintaining mortality
statistics and to assist in the planning of healthcare provision and public health strategies.
19.14 It will be observed that I have not sought to draw any distinction between ‘natural’ and
‘unnatural’ deaths. This is a distinction that sometimes causes practical difficulty and
results in decisions that are difficult to justify logically. The aim of the Coroner Service
should be to investigate all deaths to an appropriate degree. With many, it will be sufficient
to confirm and record uncontroversial basic information about the deceased and the
medical cause of death. With others, there will be a need for investigation of the
circumstances of the death and its medical cause. There should not be fixed categories
of deaths that require and do not require in-depth investigation. Coroners should receive
guidance about what types of death are likely to merit detailed investigation but the extent
of the investigation in an individual case should depend upon the circumstances and any
concerns expressed.
The Need for Leadership, Training and Expertise in the Coroner Service
19.15 As I described in Chapter Seven, coroners follow markedly differing practices and provide
services of variable quality. In future, the Coroner Service should provide leadership,
training and guidance for coroners, with the aim of achieving consistency of practice and
a high quality of service throughout the country. This should be provided by means of a
unified national Service, centrally governed and operating through regional and district
offices.
19.16 In my view, the Coroner Service requires medical, legal and investigative expertise. A
coroner should not, as now, carry out all coronial functions regardless of whether s/he is
legally or medically qualified. In future, s/he should perform only those functions for which
s/he is professionally qualified. Coroners should have the support of trained investigators.
All coroners and investigators should be given initial and continuing education relevant to
their functions and all must be trained in dealing with the bereaved and in the issues
affecting minority groups. Such training should be compulsory.
19.17 Many times in this Report, I have drawn attention to the need for medical expertise in the
coroner’s office. At present, although most coroners are legally and not medically
qualified, they carry out functions that require medical expertise. The conduct of inquests
apart, the job of coroner requires medical knowledge far more often than legal knowledge,
and entails a medical judgement far more often than a legal one. The coroner must decide
whether a death falls within his/her jurisdiction. This is not usually a difficult legal issue but
requires an assessment of the known facts, a process which often, although not always,
depends upon medical knowledge and judgement. The coroner often has to decide
whether to certify a cause of death, on the basis of an autopsy, without an inquest. The
490
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
interpretation of the autopsy results, in the light of other available evidence, is essentially
a matter of medical rather than legal judgement. In any event, in my view, the identification
of the cause of death in a case of uncertainty need not and should not always automatically
entail the conduct of an autopsy. Consideration by a medically qualified person of other
materials, such as medical records and information about the circumstances of death,
should, in many cases, sufficiently identify the cause of death. Apart from the conduct of
inquests and the investigation that precedes some of them, most of the coroner’s functions
call for medical expertise. In my view, there is a need, within the coroner system, for a
medically qualified person to exercise many of the functions presently carried out by
coroners who have, in the main, no medical expertise.
19.18 Sometimes, although not always, the task of directing an investigation into the
circumstances of a death requires legal expertise. So, obviously, does the conduct of an
inquest. My proposals in relation to the cases in which an inquest should be held would,
if adopted, result in a substantial reduction in the number of public inquests. I envisage
that many coroner’s investigations would result in a written report rather than an inquest.
At the present time, it appears to me that most such investigations and reports would not
require the attention of a coroner with legal expertise. I shall discuss this topic in greater
detail below. However, there would be other functions in the new system that I propose
which would call for legal expertise. I envisage that a legally qualified coroner would be
required in order to exercise a number of special powers, such as authorising the right to
enter premises and seize property and documents relevant to the investigation of a death,
which I am proposing should be available to coroners. A legally qualified coroner would
also be required to exercise a number of appellate functions, which I am proposing should
be introduced, particularly relating to issues affecting a citizen’s rights. Plainly, there will
be a need for legally qualified persons in the Coroner Service as well as for those with
medical qualifications.
19.19 What should these medically and legally qualified persons be called? In my view, they
should both be coroners, as both would fulfil what have traditionally been regarded as
coronial functions. In the Discussion Paper, the Inquiry team tentatively gave them the
names of ‘medical coroner’ and ‘judicial coroner’. The Coroners Review, which has also
concluded that there is a need for medical expertise in the coroner’s office, proposes that
the coroner should be legally qualified and that the person with medical expertise should
be called the ‘statutory medical assessor (SMA)’. The differences between these two
proposals are not merely of nomenclature. I envisage a different role for the ‘medical
coroner’ from that which is proposed for the ‘statutory medical assessor’. The ‘medical
coroner’ would take many coronial decisions and would manage and be responsible for
the operation of the district office. He or she should be an independent office-holder under
the Crown with the status of the present coroner. The titles ‘medical coroner’ and ‘judicial
coroner’ fit the functions that I propose. I shall therefore continue to use those expressions
throughout the remainder of this Report. When referring to the proposals of the Coroners
Review, I shall use their terminology. However, I stress that there is agreement between
us that someone with medical expertise (whatever s/he is to be called and whatever the
precise ambit of his/her role) is needed in the coroner’s office.
19.20 At present, coroners depend for support on coroner’s officers who are almost completely
without training or management. In future, the coroner’s support should come from a corps
491
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
of trained investigators, who would be the mainstays of the new system. The coroner’s
investigator would replace the coroner’s officer but the role would be much enhanced and
the coroner’s officer’s more routine functions would be performed by administrative staff.
Investigators would come from different employment backgrounds and would bring a
variety of skills and experience to the work. For example, some might have a background
in criminal investigation. Others would have a paramedic or nursing background. The
essential attributes would be an independent and enquiring mind, good interpersonal
skills and particularly the ability to work with the bereaved. All investigators would be
required to handle certification of deaths, in the way that I shall describe below, exercising
powers delegated by the medical and judicial coroner. I envisage that some investigators
(those with a medical background) would become accredited to certify the fact of death
and would specialise in the investigation of the cause of death. Others would develop
skills for the investigation of the circumstances of deaths, for example deaths in the
workplace. All would be trained to approach every death with an open mind rather than a
confident expectation that the death will be natural. In other words, like investigators in
Ontario, they should be trained to ‘think dirty’.
Proposals for the Structure and Operation of the Coroner Service
Central Organisation
19.21 The Terms of Reference of the Coroners Review required it to consider where
departmental responsibility should lie for the provision of any new or changed
arrangements for death certification and the role of coroners. The Inquiry’s Terms of
Reference contained no such specific requirement. The Inquiry has not heard evidence
or received representations about the way in which the changes I am to recommend
should be effected. However, I have formed some views about what should happen
and why.
19.22 In my view, if coroners and the Coroner Service are to command the confidence of the
public, they must be and must be seen to be independent of Government and of all other
sectional interests. Although coroners investigate on behalf of the state, they might well
reach verdicts and make recommendations unwelcome to Government and sectional
interests. For example, coronial decisions critical of hospital practice might be unwelcome
to the National Health Service. In the past, there has been no suggestion of interference
by Government in the judicial independence of the coroners. They have, as I have
observed, been left to their own devices. However, I now propose that coroners should
have the benefit of leadership from a supervisory and supporting structure. The body
which is to provide that leadership and support must be seen to be independent of
Government. In my view, it would no longer be satisfactory for the coroner service to be
administered from within a Government Department. Instead, the new Coroner Service
should be a body at ‘arm’s length’ from Government, that is an Executive NonDepartmental
Public Body (ENDPB). Such bodies are formed in association with, but are
independent of, the Government Department through which they are answerable to
Parliament.
492
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
19.23 At present, responsibility for coroners lies with the Home Office, although the Lord
Chancellor has the power to discipline them. It seems likely that the association with the
Home Office arose because, historically, coroners were an adjunct to the criminal justice
system. This is no longer the case. The Home Office is also responsible for cremation
certification. Death certification is carried out either by coroners or by doctors. The doctor’s
duty arises under the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 and not from
his/her employment within the National Health Service. Government responsibility for
registration lies with the Office for National Statistics (ONS), which falls under the control of
the Treasury. The Department of Health (DoH) (in Wales, the National Health Service Wales
Department of the National Assembly for Wales) has an interest in death certification and in
many aspects of the work of coroners (the use of pathologists is an example). This
fragmentation of control and interest has led to difficulty in effecting reform in the past. As
appears from the history I recounted in Chapter Three, one of the reasons why the
recommendations of the Brodrick Report were not carried into effect was that there was
insufficient political will; the interests and priorities of the various Departments pulled in
different directions. That problem is likely to continue as, inevitably, several Government
Departments will continue to have a policy interest in the various aspects of death
certification, investigation and registration. However, I believe that the problems of
fragmentation would be alleviated if the Coroner Service had the status and independence
that enabled it to co-ordinate the various Departmental policies into a coherent overall
policy.
19.24 If the Coroner Service is to be an ENDPB, as I suggest, with which Government Department
should it be associated? The Coroners Review has suggested that the Coroner Service
should be administered directly by the Lord Chancellor’s Department (LCD) and should
have the benefit of a Coronial Council tomonitor its performance. Since the Review’s Report
was published, the Government has announced the formation of a new Department for
Constitutional Affairs, which will take over many of the functions of the LCD. At the time of
writing, it seems likely that the new Department will be responsible for the administration of
the courts and, in conjunction with a Judicial Appointments Commission,forthe selection of
the judiciary.I agreethatthe LCD would have been inmany respects, a suitable Department
to be associated with the Coroner Service. The Department was very experienced in the
appointment of judges of all levels and well understood the need to protect judicial
independence. However, there are some aspects of the work of the Coroner Service that
would not have fitted comfortably with the functions of the LCD. The Coroner Service will
haveto recruitmedical coroners or statutorymedical assessors or somemedically qualified
persons, whatever title they are given. The LCD had no experience of such functions and no
connection with the medical profession. The Coroner Service will also have an investigative
function. The LCD would havebeen ill equippedto offer support inthat respect also.In some
respects, the DoH (and its equivalent in Wales) would be a more appropriate choice. It will
be important for the Coroner Service to establish links with public health and to ensure that
itsmedical coroners do not become isolatedfrom currentmedical knowledge and practice.
I cannot at present see any advantage in the Coroner Service being associated with the
Home Office.
19.25 It seems to me that the ideal solution would be for the Coroner Service to be an ENDPB
associated with both the new Department for Constitutional Affairs and the DoH or its
493
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
Welsh equivalent. It would in that way be able to draw upon the relevant expertise
available in both Departments and would yet maintain a high degree of independence.
I realise that an ENDPB is usually associated with only one Department. However, it
appears to me that there are particular reasons why the usual practice should be
abrogated in the case of the Coroner Service. Devolution issues may have to be
addressed.
19.26 As an ENDPB, the Coroner Service would be governed by a Board. I have said that the
Coroner Service requires three forms of expertise. I suggest that the Service should be
managed by a Chief Judicial Coroner, a Chief Medical Coroner and a Chief Coroner’s
Investigator, who would be members of the Board and would provide the executive core
of the Service. I suggest that the Board might have two or three other independent
members with relevant knowledge and experience.
19.27 The Board would be responsible for the formulation of policy, the strategic direction of the
Service and the provision of the necessary facilities, buildings and personnel. It should
seek to secure adequate funding from Parliament. An important central function would be
to promote the education of the public about the work of the Coroner Service. It is desirable
that the Coroner Service should have a high public profile. I would suggest also that the
Board should make provision for a national coronial information system, organised along
the lines of that in Australia.
19.28 The Chief Judicial Coroner would provide leadership for the judicial coroners operating
throughout the country. He or she would be responsible for the continuing education of
judicial coroners and for the promotion of nationwide consistency of good practice. He or
she would also exercise some judicial functions and might conduct some inquests.
I suggest that the first appointee might be an existing judge or senior member of the legal
profession, rather than an existing coroner, and the post should be of the status of a senior
circuit judge. I consider it vital that there should be a complete break with the ethos of the
existing coronial system.
19.29 The Chief Medical Coroner would provide leadership for medical coroners and regional
medical coroners throughout the country. He or she would be responsible for the provision
of the facilities necessary for the operation of the medical coroner service at regional and
district level. He or she would be responsible for continuing education and the promotion
of good practice. He or she would establish links at a high level with those concerned with
public health and public safety. The position would call for a doctor with administrative
ability and some knowledge of or experience in the fields of public health and forensic
medicine.
19.30 The Chief Coroner’s Investigator would be responsible for the provision of a corps of
suitably trained and experienced coroner’s investigators for deployment in the regional
and district offices. He or she would devise and arrange training courses. He or she would
also devise and promulgate protocols for the conduct of investigations. He or she would
be responsible for the maintenance of high standards of investigative work. The position
might suit a former senior detective police officer or a solicitor with experience of
investigative work. I shall describe the operation of these officers and the central, regional
and district offices in greater detail at Appendix L.
494
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
19.31 The Service should have the benefit of an Advisory Council, which should provide policy
advice on all issues. This might comprise, in addition to the members of the Board,
representatives of the DoH, its Welsh equivalent, the Department for Constitutional Affairs,
the Home Office, the General Register Office, the ONS, organisations representing
doctors, nurses and those providing pathology services, the Association of Chief Police
Officers, an Ambulance Trust and an organisation such as Cruse Bereavement Care.
Regional and District Organisation
19.32 The Coroner Service should be administered through a regional and district structure, with
a regional medical coroner and at least one judicial coroner assigned to each region. I
envisage that there would be ten regions in England and Wales (coinciding with the ten
administrative regions). The Coroner Service should have jurisdiction over every death
that occurs in England and Wales and over every dead body brought within the
boundaries. Jurisdiction should not depend upon a report being made or upon the need
for an inquest. A death should be investigated in the district office most convenient in all
the circumstances.
19.33 The principal functions of the judicial coroner would be the conduct of inquests and the
direction of more complex investigations. The main functions of the regional medical
coroner would be the provision of regional services of a specialist nature such as forensic
pathology, paediatric pathology and toxicology. He or she would also undertake
investigations into the more difficult or complex medical cases, where appropriate, in
conjunction with the judicial coroner. I suggest that there might also be a regional
investigator who would supervise the investigative teams within the region and would
manage a small team of investigators at the regional office.
19.34 Each region would be divided into districts. I have in mind that each region would have
between three and seven districts and each district would have a population of about a
million. I suggest that districts should be coterminous with the boundaries of the 42 police
areas (excluding the City of London), although where a police force covers a wide area or
serves a large population, there would be more than one coronial district within that police
area. In all, I envisage between 50 and 60 district offices. Each district office would have
a medical coroner, one (or possibly more than one) deputy medical coroner (who might
work part-time), a team of coroner’s investigators and a small administrative staff. The
service would operate for 24 hours, seven days a week, although the ‘out of hours’ service
would be limited to the necessary minimum.
19.35 It will, in my view, be important to ensure that the medical coroner is and is seen to be
independent of the medical community within the district. He or she will, in many respects,
be required to ‘police’ the local doctors. It may well be necessary to appoint a medical
coroner from an area distant from the district in which s/he is to serve.
Death Certification and the Reporting of Deaths to the Coroner
A Unified System
19.36 All the evidence received by the Inquiry and virtually all the opinions expressed during
consultation suggest that the separate system of certification prior to cremation should be
495
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
abolished. It was universally recognised that we must have an improved system of death
certification applicable to all deaths, whatever mode of disposal is to follow.
The Proposal in the Discussion Paper
19.37 In the Discussion Paper, the Inquiry suggested a dual system of death certification, in
which a single medical practitioner would be permitted to certify the cause of death in a
limited class of cases, namely ‘expected deaths’ that were not in any other respect
reportable to the coroner. All deaths other than ‘expected deaths’ and all reportable
deaths were to be fully investigated by the coroner. There was to be a more
comprehensive list of circumstances in which a death was to be reported. Certification by
a doctor would be subject to safeguards that would operate through the completion of a
new set of forms. Form 1 was to record the fact of death and the circumstances in which
it occurred. It was to be completed by the health professional who examined the body and
ascertained that death had occurred. Form 2 was to replace the existing MCCD and was
to provide additional information about the deceased’s medical history. It was to be
completed by a doctor who had treated the deceased during the last illness. Form 3 was
to be completed by a member of the deceased’s family who had had the opportunity to
examine what had been said on Forms 1 and 2. It was to provide an opportunity to raise
any concerns about the death, including those caused by any perceived inaccuracy in the
information recorded on Forms 1 and 2. Form 4 was to be completed by the funeral
director who prepared the body for disposal and who was to draw attention to any signs
of violence or neglect observed. All the forms were to go to the register office; it was hoped
that the detail on the form would be such that any indication of the need for a referral to
the coroner would be readily apparent to the registrar. In the event, the registration service
did not agree that it would, for reasons that, having heard the evidence given in Stage Two,
I fully understand.
19.38 The thinking behind the Inquiry’s proposal was as follows. Although I was attracted to the
idea that all deaths should automatically be reported to the coroner’s office (because of the
difficulty doctors have in recognising reportable deaths),Ifearedthat such an arrangement
might lead to delay in the granting of permission for disposal. I thought that there would be
many ‘expected deaths’ which could be certified quickly, simply and safely by a single
doctor; there would be a sufficient safeguard against the ‘Shipman factor’ if the family were
to have the opportunity to see what the doctor had written and to raise their concerns.
19.39 However, as a result of the consultation exercise and the feasibility study carried out on
the Inquiry’s behalf, this proposal has been abandoned. First, it became obvious that it
was not easy to define an ‘expected death’; the suggested definitions were far from
simple. At the moment, most doctors apply the term to any death for which they are able
to issue an MCCD. The converse, the ‘sudden’ or ‘unexpected’ death, has to be reported
to the coroner. Not only was it difficult to define an ‘expected death’, it seemed to me that it
would be extremely difficult to wean doctors from their present understanding of the term.
Second, there was an unexpected degree of support for the idea that all deaths should be
considered by the coroner rather than only those falling within the reporting criteria. Third,
and perhaps most important, it became quite clear that, as a means of involving the family
of the deceased and providing a cross-check on the certifying doctor’s account, the use
496
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
of Form 3 would be unacceptable. Families would find the form difficult and possibly
distressing to complete; they would need help and could not be asked to deal with it
quickly. Some means of personal contact with the bereaved family would be required.
Identifying the Basic Requirements of the System
19.40 Although the consultation exercise led to the abandonment of the suggested system of
certification advanced in the Discussion Paper, it confirmed the suitability of some of the
Inquiry’s ideas. In particular, I became convinced that modified versions of Forms 1 and
2 should be the basis of the certification system. Before turning to the more difficult
question of who should be responsible for the decision on certification, I shall explain the
operation of the two new proposed forms. They are reproduced, together with explanatory
notes and sample completed forms, at Appendices G–K. The purpose of the explanatory
notes is to describe what each question is driving at and the type of information that should
be provided. The notes are not intended to be a blueprint for the explanatory notes that
would have to be provided for the doctors and health professionals who would complete
the forms. The completed sample forms have been prepared to illustrate the type of
information that should be provided. These forms contain the Inquiry’s ideas about what is
required. They will almost certainly have to be redesigned by experts. However, I strongly
recommend that the information sought in the forms eventually used should be
substantially the same as is suggested in the Inquiry’s Forms 1 and 2. The Inquiry has not
attempted to design forms for special circumstances (such as stillbirths and neonatal
deaths), which would clearly be required.
Form 1
19.41 In my view, there should be a requirement that the fact that a death has occurred should
be confirmed and certified. At the seminars, there was unanimous support for the proposal
that there should be an official record of the fact and circumstances of death. The
Coroners Review makes a similar proposal. For this purpose, the Inquiry proposes
Form 1, which would be completed by the health professional or coroner’s investigator
who confirms the fact of death. I recommend that, in addition to doctors, accredited
nurses and paramedics should be authorised to confirm the fact of death and to complete
Form 1. Coroner’s investigators should also be trained and accredited for the purpose of
certifying the fact of death. The Coroners Review has suggested that a nurse employed
in a care home should not be permitted to certify the fact of a death occurring at that home.
The Review proposes that a nurse should be provided by the local Primary Care Trust for
that purpose. I do not think that such a limitation is necessary, provided that the nurse is
properly accredited.
19.42 Different versions of Form 1 are suggested for deaths in the community, in hospitals and
in accident and emergency departments. All versions of Form 1 require a description of
the circumstances of death, including a statement as to who was present, together with
contact details. All require that some external examination of the body should take place
and the findings be recorded. For deaths in hospital, the whole body should be examined
for signs which might be indicative of violence or neglect. For deaths in the community,
497
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
where conditions for examination are often difficult, there should be an examination of the
head, neck and arms to the elbow. A special form is suggested for use in accident and
emergency departments because of the particular pressures of work in such places. A
patient might be dead on arrival or die very soon after admission. The fact of death might
be certified by a doctor and the body moved from the department to make way for other
patients. It seemed sensible that the examination of the body and the provision of
information about the circumstances of death and the contact details should be made
later, by someone other than the doctor who has certified the fact of death. Also, the
circumstances of a death in an accident and emergency department are likely to be
different from those of a death on the ward, in that the events leading to admission to the
department are likely to be more relevant than those which took place in the department
itself.
19.43 An issue arises as to whether a doctor or nurse who owns or has a financial interest in a
care home or private hospital in which the death occurred should be permitted to
complete Form 1. The concern was raised that such a person might be tempted to conceal
some form of wrongdoing by him/herself or a member of staff. It appears to me that a
doctor or nurse in that position ought to be allowed to complete Form 1. The main purpose
of this form is to certify that the patient has in fact died. That is purely a question of medical
fact and there is no reason to suppose that anyone would lie about it. It is possible that the
person completing the form might tell lies about the circumstances of death. However, if
the owner of the care home is not permitted to complete Form 1, some other health
professional will have to attend to do so. That person will be dependent on the member of
staff, probably the owner of the care home, for information about the circumstances of
death. If the owner intends to deceive, s/he will be able to do so. The only way in which
such deception might be uncovered would be by checking the information with some
other person (if there is one) with relevant information.
19.44 It should be possible for Form 1 to be transmitted promptly to the district coroner’s office
on-line or by fax.
Form 2
19.45 It seems to me clear that the certification process should include the preparation of a brief
summary of the deceased’s recent medical history and the chain of events leading to the
death. That would be provided on Form 2, which would be completed by a doctor who had
treated the deceased during the last illness or, if no doctor had treated the deceased in
the recent past, by the deceased’s usual medical practitioner. It might well be completed
by the doctor who had completed Form 1. The forms for hospital and community use are
substantially the same, although the form for use in the community requires the doctor to
describe any nursing or other care the deceased had been receiving before death. I
suggest that it should become usual practice for the doctor to attach to Form 2 any
important extracts from the medical records (e.g. the result of a test or a consultant’s
opinion). In future, with the increased use of computerised records, it should be possible
for such extracts to be sent on-line, with Form 2, to the district coroner’s office. Form 2 also
provides a box in which the doctor can draw any relevant matter to the attention of the
coroner.
498
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
19.46 The form also contains a box where the doctor has the option to express an opinion as to
the cause of death. This should be done only if the doctor is able to express an opinion
with a high degree of confidence. The declaration relating to that part of the form requires
the doctor to say that s/he is ‘able to justify the cause of death specified [above] on the
basis of the deceased’s medical history and circumstances of death’. The doctor
giving an opinion as to the cause of death should be capable of justifying the diagnosis
to the medical coroner, by reference to the medical history and circumstances of the
death, in the same way that s/he would expect to have to justify a diagnosis relating to a
live patient in discussion with his/her peers. Even if the doctor cannot give such an opinion,
s/he must still complete the remainder of the form. If the doctor is uncertain of the cause
of death, it would be plain that the death required full investigation by the coroner. I should
point out that Form 2 is not a certificate of cause of death. It provides only information and
possibly the doctor’s opinion. Certification would take place at the coroner’s office.
19.47 Form 2 does not specifically require the doctor to state when s/he last saw the deceased
alive, although the date of the last consultation with a doctor is almost bound to appear
as part of the medical history. It is not intended that a doctor should be disqualified from
expressing a professional opinion as to the cause of death simply on account of the lapse
of time since the last consultation. However, when the doctor’s opinion comes under
scrutiny, as it must, the length of time since the last consultation would be a material factor
for the person considering whether the diagnosis was reliable.
19.48 In my view, the completion of Form 2 is a very important function and should not be carried
out by junior or inexperienced doctors. I have referred to the problems presently
experienced when newly qualified house officers are given the task of completing an
MCCD. It seems to me that the doctor who describes the medical history, expresses an
opinion as to the cause of death and gives any other information to the coroner should
have some experience and authority. A doctor will not usually become a principal in
general practice until s/he has been qualified for about four years. In my view, any
principal in general practice (but not a trainee) should be eligible to complete Form 2. In
the hospital setting, I consider that the certifying doctor should have a comparable degree
of experience and authority. I suggest that, to be eligible to complete Form 2, a doctor
should have been in practice for four years since qualification. For doctors qualified
overseas, I recommend that they should not be eligible to sign Form 2 until they have been
in medical practice for four years (whether in the UK or not), are registered with the
General Medical Council (GMC) and have been trained in the requirements of death
certification in this country.
19.49 In my view, it will be necessary to impose a statutory duty upon a doctor so as to ensure
that Form 2 is completed. If the death occurs in a hospital, the statutory duty should lie
upon the consultant responsible for the care of the deceased at the time of the death. The
duty need not be fulfilled personally but would be satisfied if the form were completed by
a suitably qualified member of the consultant’s clinical team (or firm). For deaths occurring
elsewhere than in a hospital, the statutory duty would fall upon the general practitioner with
whom the deceased had been registered. Here again, the duty could be fulfilled by
another principal in the practice (who might, for example, have seen the deceased more
recently than the doctor with whom the deceased was registered). If in future, the
499
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
procedure of registering with an individual general practitioner were to be changed and
patients were to be registered with a practice, the statutory duty would have to lie on all
principals within the practice, until fulfilled by one of them. For deaths occurring very
shortly after admission to hospital, for example in an accident and emergency
department, it might be appropriate for the duty to complete Form 2 to lie upon the
deceased’s general practitioner. It might be thought sensible to impose a time limit within
which Form 2 should be completed.
19.50 If the deceased were not currently registered with a general practitioner and the death did
not occur in hospital, there would be no one to complete Form 2. In those circumstances,
the death would be investigated by the medical coroner. He or she could obtain any
relevant past medical records that were available and speak to any doctor with whom the
deceased had been registered in the past.
19.51 I recommend that the GMC should impose upon doctors a professional duty to co-operate
with the death certification system by providing an opinion as to the cause of death on
Form 2 in cases where it is appropriate to do so. A failure to co-operate would be a
disciplinary matter.
19.52 With Form 2, as with Form 1, an issue arises as to whether a doctor who owns or has a
financial interest in a care home or private hospital where the death occurs should be
eligible to complete Form 2, to provide the medical history and to suggest the cause of
death. If the doctor were to be able to certify the cause of death, I would be opposed to
that being done by a doctor who might find him/herself in a position of conflict of interest.
If the doctor were only to express an opinion, and if the death were to be certified by
someone else (such as the medical coroner or a coroner’s investigator), I can see no harm
in the doctor with a financial interest expressing an opinion, provided that the interest is
declared.
One Option – Dual Certification by Doctors
19.53 Apart from the option of the system of death certification suggested in the Discussion
Paper, which I have decided to abandon, two other options were considered at the
seminars. Both received a good deal of support. Under the first option, which I shall call
the ‘dual certification’ system, the Form 2 doctor would consider whether s/he was able to
express an opinion as to the cause of death to the high degree of confidence required by
Form 2. If not, the death would be investigated fully by the coroner. If s/he was confident
of the cause of death, a second doctor would review the first doctor’s opinion. The second
doctor would be a member of a panel selected by the medical coroner and would
therefore be independent of the first. The second doctor would attend the medical
coroner’s office on a sessional basis and, for that time, would give the whole of his/her
attention to the work of certification. Those contributors to the seminars who supported this
option recognised that the second doctor must not be expected or permitted to squeeze
the work of certification into the interstices of an ordinary working day. The second doctor
would speak to and question a member of the deceased’s family and possibly a carer,
check with them the accuracy of what the first certifying doctor had said about the death
and ascertain whether they had any concerns. The second doctor might also examine the
500
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
deceased’s medical records. Some seminar participants suggested that the second
doctor might make a physical examination of the body. However, most opposed that idea;
they regarded such an examination as impracticable (the facilities at many funeral
directors’ premises being inadequate) and pointless unless carried out by a doctor with
special training. It would also be very time-consuming.
19.54 If the second doctor were satisfied with the results of his/her enquiries, both doctors would
sign the certificate of cause of death. Registration would take place on the basis of the dual
signatures on that certificate. The registrar would give permission for disposal as now. If
during the process, any circumstance were discovered to suggest that investigation was
required, the death would be referred to the coroner. This system would be similar to
cremation certification, as it was originally intended to operate. Plainly, if such a system
were to be adopted, there would have to be safeguards to prevent the kind of deterioration
in standards that occurred with cremation certification. In the event, this ‘dual certification’
system is similar, although not identical, to the system proposed by the Coroners Review.
As a variation on the ‘dual certification’ system, the BMA suggested that all deaths should
be reported to the medical coroner and investigated on his/her behalf by a second doctor.
If that doctor agreed with the first certifying doctor, the cause of death would be certified. If
not, or if any other reason emerged, the death would be investigated further by the medical
coroner.
The Second Option – Coroner’s Certification
19.55 The second option considered at the seminars was that responsibility for all death
certification should come under the control of the Coroner Service. The coroner’s office
would be notified of all deaths and Forms 1 and 2 would be considered, initially by a
coroner’s investigator. If the doctor completing Form 2 had given a professional opinion as
to the cause of death to the high standard of confidence required by Form 2, the coroner’s
investigator would then question one or more of the deceased’s relatives or carers. The
object would be to ascertain whether there was any inconsistency between the family’s
understanding of events and the accounts given on Forms 1 and 2. In general, the family
member would be allowed to see Form 1 but would not necessarily see Form 2, which
might contain medically confidential information. However, the family member would be
asked questions that would elicit his/her state of knowledge about the deceased’s
medical history. In this way, possible inconsistencies would be brought to light. The family
would have the opportunity to raise any concerns. If no problems emerged, the coroner’s
investigator would certify the cause of death (using the cause given by the Form 2 doctor)
and authorise disposal of the body. Registration might take place on-line from the
coroner’s office, thus avoiding the need for attendance at the register office. Alternatively,
the family member/informant might attend the register office in person. If the Form 2 doctor
were uncertain of the cause of death, if the family or any other person expressed concern
or if any other circumstance were discovered that made further investigation appropriate,
the death would be referred for further investigation by the medical coroner and, where
appropriate, by the judicial coroner. I shall call this system the ‘coroner’s certification’
system.
501
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
Common Features
19.56 It will be noted that both suggested options make use of the knowledge and
understanding of the doctor, if there is one, who has treated the deceased in the period
immediately before the death. That doctor will almost always be the person with the best
knowledge available. The essential difference between the two systems is the issue of who
is to review the Form 2 doctor’s account and opinion – a second doctor or a coroner’s
investigator.
19.57 Under both proposals, there would be provision for certification of some deaths without,
in the case of a community death, there being any requirement for a full external
examination of the body. (For hospital deaths, there would be a full external examination
at the stage of completion of Form 1.) Although a full external examination carried out in
good conditions by a doctor with the necessary skills is desirable, I think it is impracticable
for all deaths in the community. Often the facilities at a funeral director’s premises are not
suitable for a visiting doctor to examine the body. Many doctors do not have the requisite
skills, although I accept that these could be taught. Even a full examination is of limited
use in determining the cause of death, although it can help to detect signs of violence or
neglect. Under either proposal, if any concern is expressed by a member of the
deceased’s family or a carer, the death would be referred for further investigation and it
would be open to the medical coroner to order a full external examination by a pathologist
under proper conditions in a hospital mortuary. Also, I shall suggest that all funeral
directors should be placed under a duty to report to the coroner any signs of violence or
neglect that they observe while preparing the body for disposal.
My Preferred Option – the Coroner’s Certification System
19.58 For reasons that I shall now explain, I strongly recommend the second of these two
proposals, the coroner’s certification system, under which all deaths would be reported
to the Coroner Service, which would take responsibility for certification and for deciding
whether or not further investigation was necessary. Cases in which the Form 2 doctor
expressed an opinion as to the cause of death would be considered for certification by the
coroner’s investigator after consultation with the deceased’s family (construed widely, as
I explained at paragraph 12.24). All other deaths would go for further investigation by the
medical coroner. I shall describe the way in which the system would operate in practice
in some detail at Appendix M.
19.59 I have said that the essential difference between the two options is who is to review the
Form 2 doctor’s account and opinion, a second doctor or the coroner’s investigator. I
consider that it is preferable for this review to be carried out by a coroner’s investigator.
There are several reasons for this. First, the coroner’s investigator will be manifestly
independent not only of the first doctor but also of the medical profession as a whole. I
have reservations about the feasibility of ensuring the independence of a second
certifying doctor, even if selected and approved by the medical coroner. In rural areas, the
medical community is likely to be small, and friendships and allegiances are inevitable.
19.60 Second, the task of checking the factual content of Forms 1 and 2 with the account given
by the family, and of allowing the family the opportunity to express any concerns, does not
502
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
call for medical expertise. In effect, such a task could be described as a ‘waste’ of the
second doctor’s time, a scarce and valuable resource. The task could be perfectly well
undertaken by a coroner’s investigator and, as such a person would be accustomed to
dealing with the bereaved on a daily basis, I consider that s/he might well do it better than
many doctors would. The work of the investigator would be directed by a protocol, with
which s/he would become very familiar. The information received could be recorded in
writing. I was impressed by the way in which ambulance paramedics confirming the fact
of death operate under a protocol and complete a record of their findings.
19.61 I acknowledge that a coroner’s investigator would not be as well equipped to check on the
medical opinion of the Form 2 doctor as another doctor would be. I recognise that, for the
consideration of the treating doctor’s diagnosis of the cause of death, the coroner’s
investigator would need some medical knowledge. He or she would have ready access
to the advice of a medically qualified coroner. The coroner’s investigator would have to be
trained to recognise when there was reason to doubt the Form 2 doctor’s diagnosis of the
cause of death, in which case the medical coroner would become personally involved.
19.62 The system I have proposed would not depend upon the decision of the Form 2 doctor or
of the second/panel doctor as to whether the death should be referred to the Coroner
Service. As I have said, research has shown that doctors are often unsuccessful in
recognising circumstances in which a full investigation is required. Any list of criteria is
bound to be quite long and complex, as the Inquiry found when it attempted to compile
one, incorporating the suggestions made in response to the Discussion Paper. I doubt that
anyone who had to consider such a list infrequently would ever become sufficiently
familiar with it to make sound decisions. I accept that the panel doctor, who could receive
training in this skill, might be more successful than the Form 2 doctor. However, research
suggests that a trained coroner’s investigator, who would consider such issues daily,
would be more successful at recognising those deaths that required full investigation. In
Maryland, USA, death investigators are trained to recognise those cases in which further
investigation is required by the medical examiner. We could learn much from the training
and operation methods employed there.
19.63 If all certificates came into the coroner’s office, it would be possible for the coroner’s
investigator to check that Forms 1 and 2 had been properly completed and that all matters
that might be relevant to the need for further investigation had been covered. The
coroner’s investigator would work to a protocol. Such a system would in my view reduce
the risk of material information being overlooked. If it were necessary to add a new criterion
for reporting a death, it would be far easier to amend the investigators’ protocol than to
promulgate the requirement to a large number of doctors.
19.64 Certification by the coroner’s investigator would impose substantially less of a burden on
doctors than would dual certification by doctors. In particular the process of consultation
with the deceased’s family, which I am convinced is an essential feature, would be
time-consuming. In my view, this should not be imposed upon doctors. Their time is a
valuable resource, presently in short supply. It is also an expensive resource. If the task
can be performed as well (or better) by a coroner’s investigator, as I believe it can, that is
the right solution.
503
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
19.65 Doctors would be relieved of the duty of deciding whether or not they could certify. They
would have to provide factual information only; they would give an opinion only when
sufficiently confident to do so. They could not then be subject to pressure to certify from
families or to the temptation to provide an untrue cause of death to avoid referral to the
coroner.
19.66 Under my proposal, the Coroner Service would take primary responsibility for the
procedures following every death. The office would be the natural focus for all enquiries.
The existence of such a focal point would remove a great deal of uncertainty. Families,
funeral directors and doctors would know who to ask for information about what was to
happen and when. The public would soon learn that it was normal for a death to be
reported to the coroner. The anxiety the family of a deceased person now feels, on
learning that the death is to be reported, would be much reduced, especially when it
became known that referral did not mean that there was bound to be an autopsy.
19.67 The Coroner Service would relieve other agencies of some of the responsibilities that they
presently carry. Perhaps most important, the registration service would be relieved of the
responsibility for considering whether a death can properly be registered or whether it
should be reported to the coroner. Those duties would rest definitively upon the Coroner
Service. The registrar’s duties would be purely administrative, as, in my view, they should
be. I shall say more about registration below.
19.68 The police and ambulance service would be relieved of the responsibility, which they
presently shoulder, of trying to locate a doctor willing and able to certify the cause of
death. In a case where no criminal involvement was suspected, the responsibilities of the
police would be limited to informing the coroner’s office of the death and undertaking
duties properly within their own province. There would, of course, always be a need for
close co-operation between the Coroner Service and the police.
19.69 A further advantage of a system in which all deaths are reported to the Coroner Service
would be the availability of complete data in respect of all deaths. For all deaths, there
would be a minimum dataset comprising Forms 1 and 2, the investigator’s record of other
information received and a copy of the certificate of cause of death. For those deaths in
which the medical coroner undertook further investigation, there would be additional
information. The retention of this dataset would have a number of advantages. First, it
would be possible to audit the process of certification. Second, it would provide an
information bank, which would be an invaluable resource for public health and research
and statistical purposes.
Random Checks on Deaths Certified without Further Investigation
19.70 At present, just over 60% of deaths are certified by doctors and are not reported to the
coroner. I think it likely that, under the system I have proposed, a similar proportion of
deaths would be certified by a coroner’s investigator on the basis of the treating doctor’s
opinion, following consultation with the deceased’s family. There are two reasons why it
would be desirable that the operation of that system of certification should be subject to
some form of random check. First, audit is a useful exercise in itself, to check that the
system is operating as it should. Second, I recognise that any system that does not
504
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
provide full investigation of every death is potentially open to abuse, particularly where two
people who take part in the process of certification collude to conceal some act of
wrongdoing. For example, if a family member and doctor were to collude in the hastening
of the death of an elderly or terminally ill patient, it would be almost impossible to discover
the wrongdoing unless all deaths were subject to full investigation, including autopsy with
toxicology, and not necessarily then. A similar problem might arise if a doctor were to
collude with a nurse in charge of a care home in the concealment of homicide, malpractice
or neglect. Such risks are probably very small but I do not think they can be ignored.
19.71 For those two reasons, I propose that a proportion of all deaths certified by a coroner’s
investigator on the basis of the opinion of the Form 2 doctor should be selected randomly
for fuller investigation at the discretion of the medical coroner. Such a fuller investigation
would be conducted according to a protocol which might include external examination of
the body, perusal of medical or nursing records, a blood test taken for toxicological
screening and a discussion with any person mentioned on Forms 1 or 2 as having
knowledge of the circumstances of the death or nursing history. It would not, unless a
specific reason arose, entail an autopsy. The medical coroner would be under a duty to
carry out a specified number of such fuller investigations and his/her performance of them
would itself be the subject of audit.
19.72 I consider that a general awareness of such a system of random investigation would act
as a deterrent to misconduct and would promote good certification practice.
Targeted Checks
19.73 One of the shortcomings of the present system is that a coroner cannot investigate any
death unless it is individually reported. He or she cannot, for example, investigate all the
deaths certified by a particular doctor or all those occurring at a particular care home. I
recommend that, in future, the Coroner Service should have the power to undertake
targeted investigations both prospectively and retrospectively. The Coroner Service
might examine the targeting methods adopted in Ontario, Canada, which I described in
paragraphs 18.46 and 18.47.
The Two-Doctor System Advocated by the Coroners Review
19.74 The Coroners Review has proposed a dual system of certification of death. It would
operate slightly differently for hospital and community deaths. However, in each case, two
doctors would consider the cause of death and whether the death should be reported to
the coroner. In respect of hospital deaths, the first certifier would be any fully registered
doctor who had treated the deceased in the last illness. The second certifier would be a
doctor of consultant status from a different ‘firm’ within the hospital and would have to be
‘approved’ by the SMA. In the community, the first certification could be carried out by any
doctor in the general practice looking after the patient, provided that the certifying doctor
or another member of the practice had seen the patient within 28 days before the death.
If there was a doctor willing and able to certify the cause of death, that doctor would then
contact a second doctor, who would be a member of a panel selected by the SMA and
trained for the work. The second doctor would review the decisions of the first certifying
505
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
doctor, both as to the cause of death and as to the decision not to report the death to the
coroner. For these purposes, the second doctor would speak to the first doctor and
examine the most important extracts from the clinical notes. If the two doctors disagreed
about the cause of death, or if either of them thought that the death should be reported to
the coroner, that would be done. If both agreed about the cause of death and that there
was no need to report it, the second doctor would countersign the MCCD and would issue
a disposal certificate, permitting disposal by burial or cremation. Registration would take
place later. There would have to be safeguards to ensure that registration took place. At
present, the incentive to register the death is that, without registration, there can be no
disposal.
19.75 This proposal bears a strong resemblance to the old system of cremation certification, with
some improvements. First, instead of the second doctor being any doctor registered for
five years, s/he would be selected by the SMA and should, in theory, be independent of
the first certifying doctor. However, this would depend upon how the panel doctor was
selected for the individual case. At present, the proposal is that the first doctor should
‘choose’ the second doctor and, either him/herself or through his/her practice staff, inform
the deceased’s family of the second doctor’s name and contact details. Second, the panel
doctors would receive training in death certification procedures and in the recognition of
which cases ought to be investigated by the coroner. Under cremation certification
procedures, the Form C doctor was not even required to consider whether the death
should be reported to the coroner.
19.76 The proposal that the cause of death should be certified and permission to dispose of the
body be given by the second doctor would have the beneficial effect that the registration
service would be relieved of the duty to consider whether or not the death should be
reported to the coroner. Whether that duty should rest solely upon doctors, in my view,
requires further consideration. In any event, there are real dangers inherent in the
proposal that disposal certificates should be allowed out of the control of the register office
or Coroner Service. Although the proposal is that only ‘approved’ doctors would be on the
panel and would be trusted with disposal certificates, it must be recognised that Shipman
himself would certainly have applied for and received approval as a panel doctor. He was
highly respected in the area by colleagues as well as patients. Many people considered
him to be the best doctor in Hyde.
19.77 My main concern about this proposal is that it is not intended that the second doctor
should contact the family of the deceased. Instead, it is intended that the family should be
made aware that the second doctor is available to them, in the event that they wish to
express any concern. I draw particular attention to that aspect of the proposal because
the evidence heard by the Inquiry (to which I referred in Chapter Twelve) suggested that
families are often either reluctant or too shocked to take the initiative to express a concern
to a stranger, even if they are conscious of one. In many of the Shipman cases, the family
members were not aware of any reasons for concern, even though they were in
possession of information which, if known to the second doctor or some other person with
an overview of the case, would have signalled a cause for concern. Also, many people are
intimidated by the thought of telephoning a doctor’s surgery and asking to speak to the
doctor personally. Arrangements for a consultation might have to be made through the
506
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
surgery staff and the doctor would have to fit the relative in among his/her patients. If the
Coroners Review proposal were amended to require the second doctor to question a
member of the deceased’s family or other person with knowledge of the recent history and
circumstances of the death (a feature that I regard as vital), the system would place a
heavy demand on the time of the panel doctors. It would also be costly for that reason.
I also consider that, if a relative wished to express a concern about the treatment provided
by the doctor providing the first certificate, s/he would probably find it easier to do so to a
coroner’s investigator than another doctor.
19.78 I have other reservations. I note that it is not intended that the second doctor should devote
him/herself to certification duties for specific sessions, although no doubt that could be
required. I do fear that a doctor who tries to fit certification into an ordinary working day
may not give it the care and attention it warrants. I have already explained the reasons why
I doubt that it is possible to ensure true independence on the part of the second or panel
doctor. In rural areas, where the medical community is small, independence would be
impossible. Even in urban areas, there could be no real independence if it were left to the
first certifying doctor to select which panel doctor s/he contacted. The Coroners Review
suggests a rota system, although I am not sure how it is proposed that that would work in
practice. In my view, to ensure independence, individual cases would have to be
allocated by the SMA to a doctor from a different locality from that of the first certifying
doctor. I think this would give rise to inconvenience and practical difficulty. I note that the
Coroners Review proposal is that, for hospital deaths, the second doctor would be a
consultant employed in the same hospital as the first. I doubt that such a proposal would
be acceptable to consultants and I fear that doctors of a lower status would be authorised.
In those circumstances, I doubt that the second doctor could be sufficiently independent,
even though approved by the SMA. In short, I consider that this proposed scheme is far
too closely related to the current system of cremation certification, which manifestly failed
to protect Shipman’s patients or to detect Shipman as a murderer.
Registration
19.79 I have already said that Form 2 is not a medical certificate of cause of death; it provides
information and, possibly, an opinion. There would be a need for a certificate of cause of
death, on which registration would be based. The Inquiry has not attempted to devise
such a certificate. The ONS has particular views about what information should be
provided in such a certificate and how it should be presented. The layout and content of
that form should be a matter for discussion between the Coroner Service and the ONS.
However, the fact that this certificate would be completed in the coroner’s office, rather
than by a doctor, would provide an opportunity to include information and classifications
of the death for statistical purposes which would not otherwise be possible. The certificate
would be completed by trained staff, under instructions, whose work would be susceptible
to quality control. The certificate might include such information as whether the death was
industrial or whether there had been an operative procedure within, say, the last 30 days.
19.80 At present, apart from the cause of death, which comes from the MCCD, the particulars
required for registration (together with other information required for statistical purposes)
are provided by the informant during a visit to the register office. If an inquest is held, the
507
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
coroner provides all the information required for registration. Under my proposed scheme,
a member of the deceased’s family would usually, although not always, attend the
coroner’s office for a discussion about the death. It seems to me that, in cases where that
occurred, the opportunity could be taken to obtain the particulars required for registration
and any other necessary information. If this were done, it might avoid the need for the
informant to visit the register office as well as the coroner’s office. As I explained at the end
of Chapter Six, changes are proposed for the registration service. It is contemplated that
registration might take place on-line or by telephone. If such a facility were to be made
available, registration of deaths could be conveniently effected from the coroner’s office
at the time of the visit. Once the cause of death had been certified (whether by the
investigator or the medical coroner), the particulars required could be obtained from the
family member, the death could be registered on-line and a disposal certificate and a
certified copy of the entry in the register of deaths obtained by return. Such an
arrangement would provide the ‘one-stop shop’ advocated by many respondents to the
Inquiry. For those who seek early disposal of their dead, such as members of religious and
ethnic minorities, it should be possible for the investigator to issue a disposal certificate
at a weekend, at a time when the register office is closed, and send the particulars on-line
to the register office on the next working day. For those families who do not attend the
coroner’s office for a face to face discussion about the death, registration could take place
as now, by attendance at the register office or, if the facility were available, on-line or by
telephone. The certificate of cause of death could be sent direct from the coroner’s office
to the register office. Whether on-line registration will be brought in remains to be seen but
the intention has been announced.
19.81 At present the registration service uses the informant’s visit as an opportunity to provide
information and advice about post-death formalities. If registration were to be carried out
from the coroner’s office, it might not be possible in many cases for the registrar to fulfil
that function. However, I do not see why such information should not be made available
at the coroner’s office. Moreover, if on-line registration is to be permitted, some informants
would not visit the register office in any event. It seems to me that discussions should take
place between the interested parties in order to establish some arrangement whereby
bereaved families are provided with the advice they need, the registration service
receives accurate information and, if possible, families are not required to visit two
separate places or discuss the death with more than one public official.
The Next Stage – Further Investigation
19.82 I now turn to describe my proposals for the treatment of deaths which are not certified on
the basis of the treating doctor’s opinion but which, for some reason, require further
investigation. In this area, there is much common ground between my proposals and
those of the Coroners Review.
Criteria
19.83 The Coroners Review has suggested a list of criteria for determining which deaths should
be reported to the coroner and has suggested that the definitive list should be compiled
508
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
and promulgated by the body with overall responsibility for the Coroner Service. As I
recommend that all deaths be reported to the coroner, there would be no need for a list of
reportable cases. However, coroners would need some guidance as to which types of
case would call for further investigation and would not be suitable for certification by a
coroner’s investigator, even if the cause of death were sufficiently known. In my view, the
list suggested by the Coroners Review would be a good starting point from which to
prepare that guidance. In summary, this includes all traumatic deaths, the deaths of all
detained persons, deaths due to any listed communicable disease, deaths due to
occupational disease, deaths due to medical error, defective treatment, neglect and
adverse drug reactions, deaths associated with childbirth, deaths of vulnerable children,
drug-related deaths and deaths of which the cause is uncertain or in respect of which
there is concern about the circumstances.
19.84 In my view, it will be extremely difficult to provide a list that encompasses all those deaths
which require further coronial investigation. However, it should, in my view, be quite
possible to train coroner’s investigators to recognise the type of circumstances that call
for investigation. Under my proposals, a coroner’s investigator would consider the
circumstances of deaths daily, if not several times a day, and would make a decision on
whether further investigation were required. Familiarity with the concepts and frequent
repetition of the decision process should, in my view, lead to a far higher degree of
accurate recognition than would be achieved by doctors undertaking the task much less
frequently.
19.85 I am also of the view that there should be some flexibility as regards the referral of a death
for further investigation. A death should not be certified just because it does not fit into one
of the criteria if there is some reason why it should be looked at more closely. For example,
where a young, fit person succumbs rapidly to a virulent infection, the cause of death
might be established by autopsy and ancillary tests and the death might not fall within any
category calling for further investigation. However, in such a case, it might well be worth
trying to discover how the deceased was infected, what the signs were and what treatment
was given. Such an investigation could be of value to medical science. If such a death
were brought to the attention of the medical coroner, s/he would have the option of taking
the investigation further.
19.86 I agree with the Coroners Review that the coroner’s investigators’ guidance or the doctors’
list of reportable criteria should be kept under constant review. It is not possible to foresee
all the circumstances that might call for death investigation. For example, a year ago, no
one would have foreseen the need for a sudden death from pneumonia to be investigated
by the coroner. Yet today, no one would disagree with the proposition that a death in this
country from severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), which is a form of pneumonia,
should be investigated by the coroner, not because it is an unnatural death (it plainly is
not) but because it would be in the public interest to discover how it had been contracted,
the course of the disease and where and how it had been treated. Under the existing
requirements, a death from SARS would not be reportable. Under the list suggested by
the Coroners Review, SARS could be included by amendment of the list of reportable
communicable diseases.
509
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
The End Product of Further Investigation
19.87 In Chapter Nine, I said that in general there should be an inquest only in a case in which
the public interest requires a public investigation for reasons connected with the facts and
circumstances of the individual case; an inquest should not be held merely because the
case falls within a broad category such as those defined by section 8 of the Coroners Act
1988. I suggested that there should be a few quite narrow categories in which an inquest
would be mandatory; otherwise the decision as to whether the public interest required an
inquest would be for the judicial coroner and would be subject to appeal. Such a system
would allow a proper balance to be held between the public need to know about some
deaths and the right of bereaved families to privacy in cases in which no issue of public
interest arises. As I have said, I am in agreement with many of the views expressed in the
recent Report of the Coroners Review relating to the outcome, scope and conduct of
inquests. I have identified at paragraph 9.76 the precise areas of agreement.
19.88 In a case in which there is no sufficient public interest to warrant an inquest, the product
of the further investigation would be the provision of a coroner’s report explaining how and
why the deceased died. The report would also set out any recommendations which the
coroner thought appropriate for the avoidance of death and injury in future. The report
would be prepared by the medical or judicial coroner who had undertaken the
investigation. Occasionally, they might write a joint report. The report should be primarily
for the benefit of the family of the deceased but should also be provided to any party or
public body with a proper interest in its receipt. The question of whether such a report
should be available to the general public is a difficult one and, in my view, requires careful
further consideration. I note the views of the Coroners Review. I myself do not feel that this
issue has been covered in sufficient detail during the Inquiry for me to be able to express
a concluded opinion. I suggest that there should be close consideration of the practice
followed in Ontario, Canada, which I referred to in Chapter Eighteen.
19.89 The report of the death would append the result of an autopsy or other special
investigation or expert opinion. If the family wished to have the decision explained in a face
to face interview at the coroner’s office, this could be done either by a coroner’s
investigator or, in a more complex case, by the medical coroner and, possibly, the
pathologist who had conducted the autopsy.
19.90 The report prepared by a medical coroner alone would also contain a statement that the
medical coroner did not consider that there was any reason to refer the death to the judicial
coroner. If a member of the family wished the judicial coroner to consider the death with
a view to further investigation of the circumstances of the death or the holding of an
inquest, the death would be so referred. If the judicial coroner declined to investigate, an
appeal could lie to the Chief Judicial Coroner.
19.91 An important objective of further investigation (whether conducted privately or publicly at
inquest) should be to learn from past experience, in particular in seeking to avoid the
repetition of avoidable injury and death. At present, the coroner’s power to make a
recommendation, useful though it is, lacks force. I suggest that the recommendation of a
medical or judicial coroner should be submitted to the Chief Coroners. If they ratified it,
they would then be responsible for taking it forward, at a high level, first by submitting it to
510
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
the appropriate body and then by pursuing that body until a satisfactory response had
been received and action taken. This procedure would give recommendations greater
authority than at present. The process could be dealt with speedily where necessary.
Procedures
19.92 The framework for the investigative procedures to be followed once a death had been
identified as requiring further investigation would be for the Board of the Coroner Service
to determine. In any individual case, the course to be followed would be a matter for the
individual medical or judicial coroner to decide. The remarks in the following two
paragraphs are by way of suggestion only.
19.93 I would suggest that any death that required further investigation should be considered
first by the medical coroner. If uncertainty arose as to the medical cause of death, the
medical coroner’s first duty would be to establish the cause, if possible. He or she would
give instructions as to what was required. If it appeared that the cause of death was known
but that there were factual circumstances requiring investigation, the medical coroner
might refer the case directly to the judicial coroner or could consult with the latter as to how
to proceed. If it appeared that issues of both a medical and a circumstantial nature arose,
the medical and judicial coroners would decide together what investigations were to be
carried out and by whom. I do not envisage that the judicial coroner would have to be
involved in every death in which any need arose to investigate the circumstances. After
all, doctors are accustomed to making diagnoses in the context of the surrounding factual
circumstances. They do not approach the medical issues in isolation. By way of example,
a death following an injury caused by a fall would not usually require consideration by the
judicial coroner. It would be possible to develop protocols for the investigation of the most
commonly occurring types of death. For example, a protocol might require that, in any
death which involved a piece of equipment in which a defect might have caused the
death, the equipment should be inspected by an expert.
19.94 In general, the medical coroner would retain responsibility for all investigations in which it
appeared likely that s/he would be able to reach a conclusion about the cause and
circumstances of the death and in which there would be no need for an inquest. In any
case in which it appeared to the medical coroner that there should be an inquest, or if it
appeared that the judicial coroner might wish to order an inquest in the public interest, the
investigation would proceed under the joint direction of the judicial and medical coroners,
at least until the cause of death had been established. At any stage thereafter, the judicial
coroner might decide to assume total responsibility for the further conduct of the case. The
judicial coroner might still use the services of the district investigative team or s/he might
call upon the regional facilities, including the regional investigator.
19.95 The judicial coroner should, in my view, exercise the powers to order entry and search of
premises and seizure of property and documents relevant to a death investigation, which
powers should be made available, as I suggested in paragraph 9.71. The medical coroner
should have the power to seize medical records and drugs relevant to a death
investigation. The judicial coroner should hear appeals from certain decisions made by a
medical coroner, such as a decision to order or not to order an autopsy or the seizure of
medical records or drugs.
511
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
Investigation of the Medical Cause of Death
19.96 In cases where the medical cause of death is to be investigated, there should not be an
automatic resort to autopsy. The medical coroner would have a variety of investigative
tools at his/her disposal. He or she might direct that there be an inspection of the scene
of the death and that witnesses, including the deceased’s family and any carers, be
interviewed. He or she might examine the medical records and discuss the case with any
doctor with knowledge of the case. A pathologist might be instructed to carry out an
external examination of the body. In some cases, a full autopsy with histology and
toxicology might be necessary. In others, toxicological screening from a blood or urine
sample might be carried out, without autopsy. That might be done, for example, after a
road traffic accident, where the cause of death might be obvious, but there was a need to
see whether drink or drugs might have contributed to the cause.
19.97 Where the medical coroner was considering ordering an autopsy, s/he or the investigator
involved in the case would speak to the next of kin or family member with whom contact
had been established, to explain why an autopsy was considered necessary. As I have
said in Chapter Twelve, the evidence I heard suggested that, if the need were explained,
there would rarely be any objection. However, in some cases, there will be an objection,
whether for religious or cultural reasons or as a matter of personal conviction. In my view,
there should be an opportunity for that objection to be advanced, so that the medical
coroner could make his/her decision in the light of it. Then, if the medical coroner
nevertheless decided that an autopsy was necessary, there should be a right to appeal
the decision to the judicial coroner. Conversely, in a case in which the medical coroner
had reached a conclusion that the cause of death had been identified and that no further
investigation was required, but the family were of the view that there should be an autopsy,
there should be a right to make representations to the medical coroner and to appeal to the
judicial coroner. Indeed, I consider that there should be a general willingness to receive
representations from families whenever a significant decision about the conduct of the
investigation is made.
19.98 In general, the medical coroner should seek to establish the cause of death to a high
degree of confidence, comparable to that envisaged by Form 2. However, in an
appropriate case, it should be open to a medical coroner to certify the cause of death to
a lower degree of confidence. In my view, provided that the medical coroner has satisfied
him/herself that there is no other reason why the death should be investigated further, it
should be sufficient that the cause of death be established on the balance of probabilities.
In such circumstances, it is undesirable that there should be exhaustive investigation,
including an autopsy, designed to establish which of two or more potentially fatal
conditions from which the deceased suffered had actually caused the death. In some
cases, it might be appropriate for the medical coroner to certify that the death was due to
‘unascertained natural disease process’. I recommend that such a cause should not be
certified without toxicological screening of a blood or urine sample.
19.99 Such cases would most often arise with the death of a very elderly person, where it is
frequently difficult to determine which condition has proved fatal and often inappropriate
to conduct an autopsy for that purpose. It should be rare for the death of a younger person
512
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
to be certified to this lower standard of confidence. In making this distinction, I am not
suggesting that lower standards should suffice for the elderly; far from it. However, it must
be recognised that many elderly people have multiple pathologies, any one of which might
be fatal. The safeguard for the elderly must be not so much to ascertain the precise cause
of death as to ensure that the circumstances of the death give rise to absolutely no cause
for suspicion or concern.
19.100 I would also suggest that a medical coroner should be permitted, in an appropriate case,
to certify that a death was due to ‘old age’. In the event that a system of certification by
doctors were to be retained, I would not be in favour of allowing a treating doctor to certify
a death as due to that cause. Although, if strictly applied, the criteria for certifying a death
as due to ‘old age’ can amount to a positive diagnosis of a cause of death, in general, the
term implies a degree of uncertainty as to which organ failure has precipitated the death.
In those circumstances, certification of the cause of death to the high degree of
confidence required by Form 2 would seem impossible.
19.101 A medical coroner might on occasions have to certify that the cause of death was
unknown, but that should, in my view, be acceptable only after a full autopsy with
toxicology had been carried out.
19.102 Some investigations might be quite long and complex. Some might entail consultation with
or referral to the regional medical coroner or the judicial coroner. The medical coroner
should always seek to allow the disposal of the body at the earliest appropriate time. This
could be done as soon as the body has been identified and it has been decided that it will
not be required for further investigations. Usually, it would, as now, be possible to permit
disposal of the body before investigation of the circumstances of death is complete and
possibly before a conclusion has been reached as to the cause of death. If the medical
coroner was satisfied that the cause of death was known, but the investigation into the
death was not yet complete in other respects, s/he would inform the family and the register
office of that cause. If there remained any uncertainty about the cause of death, which
could not be resolved until the circumstances had been fully investigated, the medical
coroner should provide the register office with a provisional cause. At the seminars, the
ONS stressed the need for them to receive details of deaths, with provisional causes, more
promptly than is often the case at present.
Investigation by the Judicial Coroner
19.103 I have said that the main function of the judicial coroner would be the conduct of inquests
and the direction of the preceding investigation, possibly in conjunction with a medically
qualified coroner. In addition, the judicial coroner would direct the more complex
investigations into the circumstances of deaths where an inquest was not envisaged. In
those cases in which both medical and circumstantial investigations were required, the
two coroners would work together, each applying his/her professional expertise to the
problem.
19.104 I think, although I cannot be certain of this, that fewer judicial coroners would be required
than at present and I envisage that they would operate from the regional offices rather than
being present in every district office.
513
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
19.105 As I said in Chapter Seventeen , I consider it desirable that judicial coroners who have to
conduct inquests should be relieved of the day-to-day responsibility for the pre-inquest
investigation. They should direct the investigation but responsibility for the collection of
evidence should devolve onto a legally qualified person in the regional office. I also
consider it desirable that the judicial coroner should have the assistance of that person or,
in the more complex cases, counsel to the inquest, who would present the evidence and
call the witnesses.
Inquests Arising from Criminal Cases and Deaths Investigated by Other Agencies
19.106 Where the police suspected criminal involvement in a death, the Coroner Service would
co-operate with their investigation, for example by ordering an autopsy. The Service would
not in any way interfere with the police investigation. If criminal proceedings were
commenced, there should be no need for an inquest to be opened and adjourned, as is
the present practice. If the proceedings resulted in a conviction, the medical coroner
would usually need to do no more than write a report recording the fact of the conviction,
the cause of death and the brief circumstances of the death. In a rare case, a public
interest issue might arise, in which case an inquest would be appropriate, but in most
cases there would be no need for an inquest in any case following a conviction for murder,
manslaughter, infanticide or causing death by dangerous or careless driving. If the
proceedings led to acquittal, the death would be referred to the judicial coroner for
inquest.
19.107 If any other agency (such as the Health and Safety Executive) were to investigate a death,
the medical coroner would normally await the report of that investigation before
proceeding with any investigation other than that necessary to establish the cause of
death. When the other agency’s investigation was complete, the report and the result of
the medical coroner’s investigation of the cause of death would be sent to the judicial
coroner, who would decide whether any further investigation was required and whether
an inquest should be held. If no inquest were to be held, the judicial coroner would write
a report.
Allegations of Medical Error or Neglect
19.108 The evidence suggests that cases in which death was or might have been caused or
contributed to by medical error or neglect are under-reported. It also appears that many
doctors consider that it would be wrong for the coroner to examine the possibility that
medical error might have contributed to a death. I cannot accept that doctors should be
treated any differently from others whose errors lead to death. A driver whose negligence
causes death is likely to face criminal prosecution and the death will be investigated by
means of a coroner’s inquest. If a workman dies as the result of a fall from an unsafe place
of work, the employer responsible is likely to face criminal prosecution and a coroner’s
investigation. I cannot see why mistakes made by doctors should not be investigated by
the coroner. Yet, at present, it appears that many cases of potential medical error are not
reported to or investigated by coroners. The coroner’s conclusions would not be
determinative of civil liability.
514
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
19.109 At the international seminar, I learned that similar reporting problems had been
experienced in Victoria, Australia, where a system of identifying and investigating cases
of potential medical error is being developed. I recommend that the Coroner Service
should study that system with a view to introducing something of a similar nature in this
country.
19.110 At present, cases of possible medical error or neglect are usually brought to the coroner’s
attention as the result of an expression of concern by a member of the deceased’s family.
Sometimes, such cases are reported by hospital staff. Under the new system, I would
suggest that, in any such case, the medical coroner should carry out an initial
investigation. If s/he were to conclude that the allegation had some foundation and that
the error or neglect complained of might have caused or contributed to the death, s/he
would refer the case to the regional office for investigation by the regional medical coroner
and judicial coroner. In my view, such investigations are likely to be time-consuming and
also require special expertise. They should not in general be dealt with by the medical
coroner, who will usually be busy with his/her daily caseload and the management of the
district office. If, after initial investigation, it appeared to the medical coroner that there was
no evidence of medical error or neglect, or that any such error or neglect could not have
caused or contributed to the death, the medical coroner would advise the family that s/he
intended to certify the cause of death without further investigation. It would be open to the
family to appeal to the judicial coroner against that decision. The medical coroner would
also advise the family of the possibility of making a complaint to any relevant authority. He
or she would write a report of the investigation, including an account of the original
expression of concern.
19.111 Cases transferred to the regional office would be investigated under the direction of a
legally qualified person. There should be a small team of investigators at every regional
office who can develop expertise in medical cases. Appropriate expert opinions would be
obtained. At the Inquiry seminars, there was discussion of the idea that the coroner might
refer a case to a multi-disciplinary committee of experts, similar to those set up by the
National Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths. That seems to me to be a good
idea in a case where more than one or two expert opinions would be required for proper
investigation. I was also interested in the method of investigation adopted in Ontario,
Canada, where standing committees of experts are used to review cases of possible
medical error and also review the treatment provided in various types of case, where
lessons might be learned from examination of the treatment provided before death. A
system of investigation is also being developed in Victoria, Australia, which I described in
paragraph 18.24. I recommend that the Coroner Service should consider all these ideas.
19.112 At the end of the investigation, the judicial coroner would decide whether or not an inquest
should be held. In cases in which s/he decided not to do so, the judicial coroner and the
regional medical coroner would agree between themselves as to which of them should
write the report or whether they should write a joint report.
Funding, Resources and Recruitment
19.113 Implementation of my proposals would require adequate funding and resources for the
Coroner Service. A new improved service is bound to cost more than the old, which in
515
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
some places appears to have been run on a shoestring and does not, in any event, provide
good value for money. I have not commissioned work on costings for the reasons I
explained in Chapter One. I recognise that my proposals will not work satisfactorily and
will lead to unacceptable delays in death certification and in the disposal of bodies unless
the system is properly funded.
19.114 There are a number of features common to the system I propose and to that proposed by
the Coroners Review. Under both proposals, there will be a need for a central
organisation. Under both, all deaths will be subject to some degree of scrutiny. Under
both, there will be a need for medically qualified persons in the district coroner’s office. It
is likely that the rather more responsible position that I envisage for the medical coroner
will be slightly more expensive to fill than the post of SMA, proposed by the Coroners
Review. It may be that the status, managerial responsibility and higher remuneration of the
medical coroner would prove more attractive to candidates of a high calibre than the more
limited and routine functions of the SMA. Both sets of proposals recognise the need for
trained coroner’s investigators.
19.115 The resource impIications of the choice between my proposals for certification and those
of the Coroners Review are, I think, quite considerable. Under both sets of proposals, a
substantial percentage of deaths (currently about 40%) would require full investigation by
a coroner. The cost of such investigation is likely to be similar under each set of proposals.
However, the remaining 60% (about 320,000 deaths per year) would be certified either by
a coroner’s investigator on the basis of the Form 2 doctor’s opinion (my proposal) or by a
second doctor who had reviewed the first certifying doctor’s opinion (the Coroners Review
proposal). It seems to me that my proposals have resource advantages because they
place a lesser demand upon the services of doctors than do the Coroners Review
proposals, even as presently envisaged. However, if the Coroners Review system were
amended to include a requirement that the second doctor must question a member of the
deceased’s family (which I believe is essential), it would then place very heavy demands
on the doctors. It seems to me that there are two resource advantages in using coroner’s
investigators rather than doctors. First, the coroner’s investigator is likely to be a less
expensive resource than a doctor. Second, a fully trained coroner’s investigator could be,
within a relatively short time, a less scarce resource than a doctor.
19.116 At all stages of the Inquiry, concern has been expressed about the shortage of doctors
and the pressures on their time. I have tried to take those factors into account. Both my
proposals and those of the Coroners Review will require the full-time appointment of
doctors to the Coroner Service. At the seminars, both the BMA and the DoH
representatives expressed the view that, if the position of medical coroner had sufficiently
attractive terms and conditions of service and if steps were taken to avoid professional
isolation, there would be a pool of suitable applicants seeking a career change and these
would be doctors who were likely to leave clinical practice in any event. They would not,
therefore, be lost to practice as a direct result of the creation of the role of the medical
coroner. Whether an adequate supply of second certifying doctors could also be
provided, I cannot say. Both my proposals and those of the Coroners Review would
require the appointment of investigators, some of whom should come from a medical or
nursing background. My proposals would require more such investigators than would
516
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
those of the Coroners Review. I recognise that there is also a severe shortage of nurses.
However, I believe that many nurses retire from hospital work at a relatively early age.
I envisage that some nurses and paramedics, who might in any event give up their work
in, say, their 40s or early 50s, might be attracted to a new career (possibly part-time) in
which their medical knowledge could be used.
19.117 I have been anxious to avoid any proposal that would significantly increase the time spent
by doctors on death certification. It seems to me that the absolute minimum that must be
provided by doctors is the medical history. The completion of Form 2 might take a little
longer than the conscientious completion of an MCCD and cremation Form B. I recognise
that this requirement would be imposed in all cases and not only those to be followed by
cremation. If the doctor also completed Form 1, there would be additional work, but there
is some overlap, and parts of Form 2 are not to be completed if Form 1 has, to the
knowledge of the Form 2 doctor, been correctly completed. When I take into account the
time presently spent by doctors in visiting mortuaries and funeral directors’ premises for
the purpose of completing cremation Forms C, I do not think that my proposals will impose
much additional burden on the medical profession. In any event, if there is an additional
burden, I think that the importance of the function is such that the increase must be borne.
19.118 I do not think it appropriate that I should suggest whether and, if so, how doctors should
be paid for the completion of Forms 1 and 2. At present, they receive no payment for the
completion of an MCCD. Cremation certification is paid for by the deceased’s family or
estate. What should happen in future should be a matter for Government. However,
consideration could be given to the idea, which received some support at the seminars,
that the responsibility of the National Health Service towards patients, which at present
ceases at the moment of death, should continue until disposal of the body. In that way, a
doctor’s duty to complete Forms 1 and 2 could become a contractual duty, rather than
merely a professional one.
Pathology Services
19.119 Under the system I have proposed, I hope and anticipate that there would be a reduced
demand for routine coroner’s autopsies. If so, there would be less pressure on the existing
resources and it should be possible for autopsies to be carried out to a consistently high
standard, which is not always possible at present. In my view, all autopsies should be
carried out to the standards recommended by the Royal College of Pathologists (RCPath)
in their document ‘Guidelines on autopsy practice’ that I referred to in Chapters Nine and
Ten. I endorse the suggestion made by Dr Peter Goldblatt of the ONS that the content of
a properly conducted autopsy should be formally recognised, possibly by the production
of a code of practice with statutory force. This could be negotiated between the Coroner
Service and the RCPath. Pathologists should be provided with improved background
information about the deceased’s medical history and the circumstances of the death, so
that they can interpret their findings in context. They should be free to carry out whatever
special examinations they consider necessary for the completion of a thorough and
accurate report, provided that there is proper medical justification for the conduct of those
examinations. It should not be acceptable for coroners to restrict the professional freedom
of the pathologist. I would also endorse the suggestion made at the pathology seminar that
517
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
it should be acceptable for a coroner’s autopsy to be conducted by a trainee, provided
s/he was properly supervised. Now that so few hospital autopsies are carried out, such a
practice is essential if a proper supply of trained pathologists is to be maintained.
19.120 It seems to me that greater use should be made of toxicology in the investigation of deaths
of which the cause is not immediately apparent. I say that not only in the light of experience
of the Shipman case. Evidence about the medical examiner system operated in Maryland,
USA, convinced me of its general usefulness. Dr David Fowler said that their system of
toxicological screening exposed a number of drug-related deaths that had been wholly
unsuspected. The objection is that toxicology is expensive and slow. The experience in
Maryland persuaded me that the process need not be slow, at least if what is required is
a preliminary screening process, generally using chromatography. Once the equipment
has been purchased for such screening, the more it is used, the cheaper each test
becomes. Only in the minority of cases, where screening has revealed something of real
concern, would there be a need for the more expensive and delaying quantitative
analysis. It should be the aim of medical coroners to move towards the use of toxicology
in virtually all autopsies and in some cases in which no autopsy is conducted.
19.121 During the seminars, there was little support for the proposal that a limited autopsy should
ever be carried out in a case where the cause of death was not known. I accept that such
a procedure risks the failure to discover the true cause of death. I also respect the view
expressed by Professor Margaret Brazier, Chair of the Retained Organs Commission, that
there would be little call for a partial autopsy if the reasons for and benefits of the autopsy
procedure were fully explained to the family. However, it is clear that some people express
a strong wish that their bodies should not be invaded after death and some families and
religious or ethnic groups are strongly opposed to an autopsy. I am of the view that it
should be possible for the medical coroner to authorise a partial autopsy. Any limitation
would have to be very clearly defined and would have to be subject to the stipulation that,
if the pathologist needed to go beyond what had been authorised, in order to reach a
satisfactory conclusion as to the cause of death, s/he would be free to do so.
19.122 It appears to me that non-invasive diagnostic techniques, such as magnetic resonance
(MR) scanning, may well be able to make a real contribution in the future. At present, they
are of limited use. Under my proposals, it would be open to a medical coroner to make use
of such methods, although I do not think it could be expected at present that such a facility
should be provided at public expense. If the medical coroner were satisfied that an MR
scan provided a sufficiently certain cause of death, s/he could certify the death on that
basis.
19.123 I do not propose to say much about the retention of organs and tissues following a
coroner’s autopsy. Plainly this issue will have to be addressed at some stage and
guidance provided for coroners by the Coroner Service. It seems to me that the principles
should be similar to those I have suggested in connection with the autopsy itself. The
medical coroner must have the power to order retention of organs and tissues if such is
necessary for the purpose of his/her investigation. However, there must be complete
honesty with the family of the deceased and they must have the opportunity to object to
retention and to appeal to a higher level within the Coroner Service if dissatisfied with the
518
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
medical coroner’s decision. I anticipate that, provided the principles explained by
Professor Brazier at the pathology seminar are followed, little difficulty is likely to be
encountered. Professor Brazier’s experience is that, provided that families are told the
truth and the reasons why the organ or tissue is needed are fully explained, most will
not object.
19.124 The shortage of pathologists, particularly those with a special expertise, gives rise to
concern. The particular problems caused by a shortage of forensic pathologists has been
recognised and, as I reported in Chapter Ten, considered in a Home Office Review. The
proposal is that there should be a national forensic pathology service integrated into the
Forensic Science Service (FSS), which is an Executive Agency of the Home Office. The
Review rejected the alternative suggestion that the forensic pathology service should be
within the jurisdiction of the DoH and should be given a measure of independence by the
creation of a Special Health Authority. One of the reasons why the Home Office Review
opted for integration with the FSS was the close association of forensic pathologists with
the criminal justice system. That I can well understand. Another reason, however, was the
association between the forensic pathologists and the coroners, who presently fall within
the remit of the Home Office. However, if either my proposals for the new Coroner Service
or those of the Coroners Review are implemented, coroners will no longer be associated
with the Home Office but will either be run by the Department for Constitutional Affairs or
be an ENDPB associated with either or both of the Department for Constitutional Affairs
and the DoH (or its Welsh equivalent). The rationale for the integration of the forensic
pathology service into the FSS would be much weakened. From the seminar discussions,
it appeared to me that there are strong arguments to suggest that the criminal justice
system and the Coroner Service would both be well served by a pathology service which
included both forensic pathologists and those histopathologists who conduct most
coronial autopsies and which operated under the auspices of a Special Health Authority.
19.125 The Home Office Review also suggested that the pathology service should attempt to set
up regional ‘centres of excellence’. These would make the best possible use of the scarce
resources of forensic pathology and other specialist services. Such a suggestion would
fit well with my proposal for regional coroner’s offices where deaths raising more difficult
or complex issues or requiring such special facilities would be investigated. A close
association between the Coroner Service and specialist pathology services, such as
exists in Victoria, Australia, would be of immense benefit.
The Duty to Report Concerns to the Coroner
19.126 The imposition of a statutory duty to report matters of concern to the coroner was
discussed at length during the seminars and is reported at paragraphs 17.74 to 17.84. In
my view there should be a statutory duty on any qualified or responsible person to report
to the Coroner Service any concern relating to the cause or circumstances of a death of
which s/he becomes aware in the course of his/her duties. In the class of ‘qualified’
persons, I include doctors, nurses, midwives and paramedics. In the class of ‘responsible’
persons, I include hospital and hospice managers, registrars, care home owners and
managers, police officers, firefighters, funeral directors, embalmers and mortuary
technicians. The duty upon such a person should be to report to a coroner or coroner’s
519
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
investigator, as soon as practicable, any information relating to a death believed by that
person to be true and which, if true, might amount to evidence of crime, malpractice or
neglect. The duty upon funeral directors, mortuary technicians and embalmers would
obviously be related to any signs of violence, medical malpractice or neglect which they
might observe when preparing the body for disposal or autopsy.
19.127 I do not think that unqualified persons or those without any specific responsibility for a
deceased person or in respect of any post-death procedure should be under a statutory
duty to report concerns about a death to the coroner. All relevant employers should,
however, encourage employees to report any concerns they may have and should ensure
that such reports as are made to them are passed on to the appropriate quarter without
delay and without any possibility of the reporter being subject to criticism or reprisal.
19.128 At present, all citizens are under a common law duty to report to the police or coroner any
information likely to lead to an inquest. The existence of this duty is not well known,
although everyone knows that they should report suspicions of crime to the police.
I recommend that the Coroner Service should seek to educate the public about the
functions of the Service and, at the same time, encourage members of the public to report
any concerns about a death.
Audit and Appeal
19.129 At present there is virtually no audit of any post-death procedure. The registration service
carries out some inspection procedures but there is no audit of death certification by
doctors or of any aspect of the work of coroners.
19.130 Under the new system that I propose, there should be systematic audit of every function.
First, there must be audit of the certification procedures. This will include examination of
the standards of completion of Forms 1 by health professionals and Forms 2 by doctors
as well as the quality of the notes kept by investigators of their conversations with doctors,
relatives and others providing information. There must be audit of the decision taken
whether to certify the cause of death or to pass the case to the medical coroner for further
investigation. Most importantly, the quality of in-house certification must also be audited,
as must the time taken to complete the post-death procedures. Such work could be
carried out by ‘an auditor’ working in either the district or regional office.
19.131 The efficiency and effectiveness of the investigative procedures of the medical and
judicial coroner’s office should also be capable of audit. So could the quality of information
provided in a medical or judicial coroner’s report of a death. This form of audit should be
a function of the central office of the Service. However, the correctness of the decisions
made by a coroner cannot be subject to audit, as this would tend to interfere with his/her
independence of judgement.
19.132 Any decision made by a medical or judicial coroner could be subject to judicial review.
However, a quicker and cheaper means of appeal could and, in my view, should be
provided, whereby decisions (whether in a report or at inquest) that are wrong in law or
plainly wrong on the facts or fail to set out the facts found or give reasons for the
conclusions can be set aside. I would suggest that the Chief Judicial Coroner should
520
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: O Proof Round:
decide such appeals, if appropriate with the Chief Medical Coroner acting as medical
adviser. From his/her decision, there should be a statutory right of appeal to the Divisional
Court on a point of law only.
The Human Rights Act 1998
19.133 In the course of this Report, I have not specifically adverted to the provisions of the Human
Rights Act 1998 or the European Convention of Human Rights. I have, however, borne the
provisions of the Act and the Convention in mind at all times. I have sought to make
proposals which not only comply with human rights law but fully respect its underlying
principles and ideals.
Transitional Arrangements
19.134 I am aware that the proposals I have advanced would require legislation and the allocation
of increased resources. I am conscious that the Coroners Review has suggested changes
that, although similar to and compatible with mine, are different in some important
respects. We have both recognised similar problems and seek to secure the same
objectives. We both hope that radical changes will be made. If changes are to follow,
important decisions must be made as to which proposed solutions should be adopted.
19.135 All this will take time. Meanwhile the existing systems must continue to function. They
could, in my view, function better than they do by the adoption of some measures that
would not require legislation. Moreover, some such improvements would be compatible
with the proposals for change and would amount to steps towards reform.
19.136 I have already suggested that, if the current system of cremation certification is to be
maintained for even a few months after the publication of this Report, which seems likely,
the procedures should be tightened up in the respects I have advocated in paragraphs
11.133 and 11.134. The Home Office has already begun to take steps towards these ends.
The requirement that the Form C doctor should question someone other than the Form B
doctor and should provide a positive answer to one of questions 5–8 would strengthen the
cremation certification process.
19.137 The Home Office should provide funding and support for improved training for coroners,
in conjunction with the Judicial Studies Board. New practices should be introduced into
coroner’s offices, for example allowing for greater involvement of the relatives of the
deceased. Improved methods of investigation could be introduced, so that, for example,
a coroner need not accept the opinion of a pathologist in isolation but would consider it in
the context of other evidence. Coroners could develop and promulgate protocols for the
work of coroner’s officers. Recruitment policies could be changed to reflect the relevance
of medical knowledge and experience to the work of the coroner’s officer.
19.138 Funding should be provided for better pathology services with increased use of histology
and toxicology. Coroners should ensure that pathologists provide full reports but that the
opinions expressed are limited to the scope of their expertise. A pathologist should not be
expected to act as an ‘all purpose’ medical expert to the coroner.
521
SHIP03$$31 26-06-03 13:45:52 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P019 Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
19.139 Training should be provided for coroner’s officers and coroner’s liaison officers. The work
of the Coroner’s Officers Association should be funded, supported and expanded upon.
The Association should be encouraged to develop protocols of good practice.
19.140 In suggesting that these steps be taken, I would not wish that these suggested
improvements to the present arrangements should be pursued at the expense of progress
towards more radical reform. It seems to me that the essential step is to decide what the
structure of the Coroner Service is to be. Legislation to provide broad enabling powers
could be passed and appointments made to provide the leadership which both the
Coroners Review and I agree is vital.
19.141 Before the final form of the new system is decided, it may be that it will be suggested that
my proposals and those of the Coroners Review should be tested in pilot schemes. I agree
that the proposed Forms 1 and 2 could be tried out alongside existing certification
procedures. The Inquiry commissioned a small feasibility study in respect of an earlier
version of these forms. Further studies would, I think, be useful. However, there would be
considerable difficulty in running a satisfactory trial of the certification system. To be
realistic, a medically qualified coroner and some suitably trained coroner’s investigators
would have to be involved. It simply would not work without appropriate personnel.
19.142 In 1971, the Brodrick Committee recommended wide-ranging changes to the current
systems of death and cremation certification and coroner investigations. Hardly any of its
proposals were implemented. I explained why in Chapter Three. As it happens, I do not
think that implementation would have prevented the Shipman tragedy. But, in many
respects, the systems would have been improved. Today, the systems do not meet the
needs of society. There is a groundswell of opinion in favour of change. It is to be hoped
that the proposals of the Coroners Review and of this Inquiry do not, as did those of
Brodrick, end in stalemate.
522
