SHIP02$EX1 27-03-03 12:14:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: SOProof Round: 1
CONTENTS
SUMMARY
CHAPTER ONE Concerns Are Raised
Introduction 13
The Dangers of Hindsight 14
Death Registration and Cremation Certification 14
Shipman’s Arrangements for the Signing of Cremation Forms C 16
Concerns at the Brooke Practice 16
Dr Reynolds Takes Action 19
CHAPTER TWO The Coroner Becomes Involved
Dr Reynolds Informs the Coroner 23
The Coroner Informs the Police 25
The Meeting Between the Coroner and the Police 25
The Arrangements for the Investigation 27
CHAPTER THREE The Investigation Under Way
The Evidence of Detective Inspector Smith 29
Detective Inspector Smith’s First Meeting with Dr Reynolds 30
The Possibility of Arranging an Autopsy 38
CHAPTER FOUR The Register Office
The Request for Copy Death Certificates 39
The Issue 40
The RivalContentions: DI Smith 40
The RivalContentions: the Register Office Staff 42
The Search of the Registers 43
Conclusion 48
CHAPTER FIVE The Next Steps in the Investigation
The First Progress Report 49
Detective Inspector Smith Collects the Certificates 49
The Significance of the Number of Deaths 50
The Death of Mrs Martha Marley 51
CHAPTER SIX The Approach to the Health Authority
Detective Inspector Smith Seeks the MedicalRecords 53
The Relevant Health Authority Personnel 53
Detective Inspector Smith Meets Mrs Parkinson and Dr
Bradshaw 54
The Records Are Put Before Dr Banks 57
CHAPTER SEVEN The Examination of the Medical Records
Dr Banks’ Functions and his Knowledge of Shipman 59
Dr Banks’ Understanding of his Task 60
Dr Banks’ Conclusions 62
v
SHIP02$EX1 27-03-03 12:14:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: E Proof Round: 1
The Shipman Inquiry
CHAPTER EIGHT Further Enquiries
What Detective Inspector Smith Probably Did from 27th to 31st
March 65
What Detective Inspector Smith Did Not Do During the Same
Period 67
Reporting and Supervision 67
The Lost Chance for an Autopsy 67
CHAPTER NINE Dr Banks Advises Detective Inspector Smith
Detective Inspector Smith Meets Dr Banks 69
Detective Inspector Smith’s Account 69
Dr Banks’ Account 70
Mrs Parkinson’s Account 71
Were Other Topics Discussed? 71
The ‘Bad Joke’ 72
Findings 73
The Adequacy of Dr Banks’ Review of the MedicalRecords 75
The Outcome of the Meeting 75
Later Developments 76
CHAPTER TEN Detective Inspector Smith’s Visit to the Crematorium
The Purpose of the Visit 77
The Visit 77
A Lost Opportunity 78
The Results of the Visit 80
Postscript 81
CHAPTER ELEVEN Detective Inspector Smith’s Knowledge of the Death of
Miss Ada Warburton
The Question to be Determined 83
The Evidence 83
Conclusion 85
CHAPTER TWELVE Mr Alan Massey Visits Shipman
Background 87
The Massey Family 87
The Origin of the Concerns about Shipman 88
Mr Massey’s State of Mind in March 1998 88
Mr Massey Decides to Visit Shipman 89
Conclusion 91
CHAPTER THIRTEEN The End of the Investigation
Two Weeks Pass 93
Detective Inspector Smith Meets the Massey Family 93
Detective Inspector Smith Proposes to Close the Investigation 95
Detective Inspector Smith’s Second Visit to Dr Reynolds 96
Detective Inspector Smith Speaks to the Coroner 97
vi
SHIP02$EX1 27-03-03 12:14:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: OProof Round: 1
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Internal Enquiries by the Greater Manchester Police
Chief Superintendent Sykes Speaks to Mr Postles 101
August 1998 102
November 1998 103
December 1998 105
The Police Decide to Record What Had Happened in March/April
1998 105
The Ellis Report 108
The Evidence Initially Submitted to the Shipman Inquiry 115
The Stelfox Report 115
Findings 117
CHAPTER FIFTEEN An Analysis of Dr Banks’ Role
Finding a Benchmark 119
Concerns about Shipman’s Failure to Report Deaths to the
Coroner 121
Concern about the Common Features 124
Signs of Substandard Care 125
Findings 126
Dr Banks’ Suspension and the Disciplinary Proceedings Against
Him 130
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Conclusions
Who Was to Blame? 133
What Would the Outcome Have Been? 135
The Greater Manchester Police Internal Investigation 137
Recommendations to the Greater Manchester Police 138
FinalThoughts 139
APPENDIX A Notes made by Detective Inspector Smith in his
daybook during the course of the March 1998
investigation
APPENDIX B Computer spreadsheet created by Detective Inspector
Smith in March/April 1998, setting out information
obtained from the copy death certificates and from the
Dukinfield crematorium
APPENDIX C Notes made by Mrs Janet Parkinson, formerly
Consumer Liaison Manager of the West Pennine
Health Authority, in March and April 1998
APPENDIX D Chart compiled by Dr Alan Banks, Assistant Director
of Primary Care and Medical Adviser to the West
Pennine Health Authority, from information contained
in 14 sets of general practitioner records examined by
him on 26th –27th March 1998
APPENDIX E Participants in Stage One of Phase Two of the Inquiry
and their Representatives
vii
SHIP02PIND 27-03-03 12:14:50 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PIND Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 1
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
SUMMARY
Introduction
1. On 31st January 2000, Harold Fredrick Shipman was convicted of the murder of
15patients and of forging the will of one of them. His trial was the culmination of an
investigation which began in July 1998 into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy.
2. Shipman had, however, been the subject of an earlier police investigation. On 24th March
1998, Dr Linda Reynolds, a principal of the Brooke Practice, which practised from
premises opposite Shipman’s surgery, reported to Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner for the
Greater Manchester South District (‘the Coroner’), her concerns, and those of her
partners, about the number of Shipman’s patients who were dying and the circumstances
of their deaths. At the request of the Coroner, a confidential investigation was carried out
by the Greater Manchester Police (GMP or ‘the Force’). That investigation was conducted
by Detective Inspector (DI) David Smith under the supervision of Chief Superintendent
(CS) David Sykes.
3. DI Smith concluded that there was no substance in Dr Reynolds’ concerns and his
investigation ended on 17th April 1998. After that time, Shipman killed three more patients
before his arrest. They were Mrs Winifred Mellor, Mrs Joan Melia and Mrs Grundy. After
Shipman’s trial, there were concerns about the thoroughness with which the first police
investigation had been carried out and whether, if it had been conducted differently,
Shipman’s course of killing could have been stopped earlier and the lives of three of his
victims saved.
4. In the course of hearings which took place between May and July 2002, the Inquiry
conducted a detailed examination of the evidence relating to the March 1998 police
investigation. This Second Report records my findings as to what occurred during this
investigation and provides my opinion as to whether or not, in performing their duties, the
conduct of the various public servants involved fell below the standard which the public
is entitled to expect.
Dr Reynolds Makes her Report
5. When Dr Reynolds made her report to the Coroner, she mentioned two particular grounds
for concern. First, she told him that she knew that Shipman, who was a single-handed
practitioner, had signed 16 cremation Forms B in the previous three months, whereas the
Brooke Practice, with a patient base of 9500, had had only 14 patient deaths during the
same period. Shipman had a patient list which was approximately one-third the size of the
Brooke Practice list. Moreover, the figure of 16 cremations within his practice would not
include:
- deaths which had occurred in hospital
- deaths followed by burial
- deaths certified by the coroner
- deaths where Shipman had asked a doctor other than one from the Brooke Practice
to complete Form C.
1
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
6. The effect of these factors was that, if Shipman’s practice followed the usual pattern, those
cremations which members of the Brooke Practice were aware of were likely to represent
no more than about 21% at most of Shipman’s total deaths during the relevant period.
Given the fact that Shipman had a patient list which was approximately a third the size of
that of the Brooke Practice, it is apparent that the disparity between the number of deaths
of patients in Shipman’s practice and in the Brooke Practice was potentially very large
indeed. It was this disparity which concerned Dr Reynolds and the other members of the
Brooke Practice.
7. The second cause of concern was the presence of features which appeared to
characterise the deaths, namely that the deceased persons were elderly women who had
been found dead at home, apparently alone, fully dressed. They did not appear to have
been ill. Shipman often found them dead. These features were unusual. It is more common
for deaths to be more or less equally distributed between men and women. Most deaths
at home occur after a period of illness, with the patient confined to bed and relatives and
friends in attendance. It is not common for a general practitioner to be present at the death
of a patient or to find a patient dead. Mrs Deborah Bambroffe (nee Massey), a partner in
the firm of Frank Massey and Son, Funeral Directors (Masseys), had expressed concern
to Dr Reynolds about those features. Mrs Bambroffe did not want her name to be disclosed
and Dr Reynolds informed the Coroner of this fact. She did not disclose the identity of
Mrs Bambroffe to him.
8. Dr Reynolds also told Mr Pollard that she had signed a cremation Form C for one of
Shipman’s patients a few days before. Mr Pollard did not discover the identity of that
patient, nor did he explore the possibility that the body might still be available for autopsy.
The Investigation Begins
9. The Coroner communicated Dr Reynolds’ concerns to CS Sykes and DI Smith. He told
them that Dr Reynolds had advanced two explanations, either of which might account for
the factors giving rise to her concerns. The first was that Shipman was a caring doctor,
who looked after his elderly and sick patients in their own homes, rather than having them
admitted to hospital, and who visited them frequently when he knew them to be ill. The
second was that he was killing his patients.
10. DI Smith began his investigation by interviewing Dr Reynolds. During the period of four
years which elapsed between the investigation and the Inquiry hearings, he gave a
number of accounts of that interview. I have found that, in his earlier accounts, DI Smith
sought to diminish the seriousness and credibility of Dr Reynolds’ concerns as explained
to him; I have concluded that he did so in the hope of avoiding criticism in respect of his
conduct of the investigation. In his oral evidence to the Inquiry, DI Smith abandoned his
previous attempts to diminish Dr Reynolds’ concerns. He admitted for the first time that
Dr Reynolds had told him early in their meeting that she thought Shipman was killing his
patients, either through lack of care or by murdering them and that, if he was murdering
them, he was doing it by giving them some sort of drug.
11. DI Smith denied, however, that Dr Reynolds had told him that there were two bodies lying
at the premises of funeral directors, which would be available for autopsy. As a result of
2
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
notes made in his own daybook (the book in which he made notes in connection with his
work: see Appendix A) and other contemporaneous evidence, I have concluded that
Dr Reynolds did indeed give DI Smith that information. The bodies were those of
Mrs Lily Higgins and Miss Ada Warburton. I have previously found that Shipman killed
both of them. However, DI Smith failed to pursue with the Coroner the possibility of
autopsies on either or both of their bodies. I think it likely that, if asked, the Coroner would
have agreed to that course. Had he been made aware, either by DI Smith or Dr Reynolds,
of Dr Reynolds’ belief that, if Shipman was killing his patients, he was doing it by
administering a drug, the Coroner would have ordered an autopsy with toxicological
examination. I think it likely that this would have happened. In that event, the presence of
morphine in either or both of the bodies would have been detected. Mrs Higgins was
cremated on 25th March 1998. Miss Warburton’s body was available for autopsy until her
cremation on 30th March 1998.
12. In the course of his interview with Dr Reynolds, DI Smith failed to ask many important
questions. He did not discover the basis of her concerns about the disparity between the
death rates of Shipman’s practice and her own, nor did he ask to see the records from
which the rates had been derived. He did not ask why the features of the deaths which
Dr Reynolds had identified gave rise to concern. He did not seek to find out more about
the circumstances of the individual deaths for which she had completed Forms C. He did
not seek an explanation of the procedures for death and cremation certification. He did
not ask to meet Dr Reynolds’ partners. As a consequence of these failures, DI Smith left
the interview, uncertain about the basis for Dr Reynolds’ concerns and, in particular, with
no understanding of the potential importance of the comparative death rates about which
Dr Reynolds and her partners were so troubled.
The Tameside Register Office
13. DI Smith next went to the Tameside register office and requested Mr Frederick Loader, the
Superintendent Registrar, to provide him with copies of all the entries in the registers of
deaths relating to deaths certified by Shipman over the previous six months. During that
period, Shipman had certified 31 deaths. On 26th March 1998, Mr Loader handed to
DI Smith a bundle of copy death certificates. Mr Loader and his staff say that, since there
had been 31 deaths in the relevant period, 31 certificates must have been handed over.
DI Smith maintains that he was given significantly fewer certificates; he now says that the
number was 20. If DI Smith is correct, the register office staff were at fault. If they are right
and DI Smith was given all 31 certificates, he must have lost 11 or 12 of them almost
immediately and failed to find them again at any time during the investigation.
14. I have concluded that it is more likely that there were errors in the register office, resulting
in an incomplete bundle of certificates being given to DI Smith. If that conclusion is correct,
it seems to me likely that Mr Loader was responsible for the errors. However, I do not think
that a high degree of blame should attach to him.
15. Because DI Smith did not understand the significance of the number of deaths or the
comparative death rates reported by Dr Reynolds, he did not recognise that the number
of copy death certificates which he received from the register office (19 or 20, covering
3
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
a period of six months) was incompatible with the number of cremation forms signed for
Shipman’s patients by members of the Brooke Practice (16 in three months). It is because
of that lack of understanding – and the fact that DI Smith attached no importance to the
numbers or death rates – that I have concluded that the error made by the register office
staff had no significant effect on DI Smith’s conduct of the investigation.
Dr Alan Banks
16. DI Smith visited the Hyde office of the West Pennine Health Authority and sought access to
the medical records of 17 of the 19 or 20 deceased persons for whom he had copy death
certificates. Since he did not have the consent of the next of kin or personal
representatives of the deceased, he was told he could not have access to the records.
Instead, it was arranged that Dr Alan Banks, Assistant Director of Primary Care and
Medical Adviser to the Health Authority, would examine the records; in the event, 14 of the
17 sets of records were available for examination. A 15th set became available at a later
stage. I have concluded that the main task which Dr Banks believed he had to perform
was to ascertain whether the medical records confirmed or denied the presence in all the
deaths of the pattern of ‘common features’ reported by DI Smith to Mrs Janet Parkinson,
the Consumer Liaison Manager for the Health Authority. These common features were that
the deaths were of elderly females; all had been found at their homes by Shipman who had
apparently called on them unannounced; all had been found during the day and in their
day clothes and all had been certified as having died from stroke or heart disease. In
addition, Dr Banks looked to see if the causes of death, as disclosed by the records, were
generally compatible with the medical histories.
17. Dr Banks claimed that he did not realise that the concern being investigated by the police
was that Shipman might be killing his patients. I do not accept that claim. I find that he must
have known that the underlying concern was that Shipman was killing patients, either
deliberately or by gross negligence. However, Dr Banks found the suggestion so
incredible that it is doubtful that he contemplated it as a real possibility.
18. Dr Banks examined the medical records on 26th–27th March 1998 and compiled a chart
(Appendix D) on which he sought to show the presence or absence of the common
features which had been identified to him. On 1st April 1998, he met DI Smith to discuss
the results of his examination. At that meeting, I am satisfied that Dr Banks told DI Smith
that there were two or ‘a few’ deaths in which he considered there was insufficient
information in the medical records to enable a proper diagnosis of the cause of death to
be made. I am further satisfied that he said that he himself would have referred those
deaths to the coroner. I do not accept that he said that such a referral would have been
mandatory or that any reasonable doctor would have made the referral. Dr Banks
suggested that the insufficiency of information might be caused by the limitations of the
computerised records. The overall impression which he created was, I am confident, one
of reassurance.
19. In my view, Dr Banks failed, when examining the medical records, to recognise features
within them which tended to support the concerns which had been identified to him. He
did not recognise as unusual the fact that 13 out of the 14 deaths for which he initially
4
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
examined records were of female patients. Although he noted on his chart that Shipman
had been present around the time of death in ten out of the 14 cases, he did not draw that
to DI Smith’s attention. It does not appear that he noticed that Shipman had visited seven
of the patients not long before the death was discovered. The medical records did not
disclose any serious concern about the patients’ condition yet, within a short time, the
patients had been found dead. Dr Banks does not seem to have noticed that 12 out of the
14 deaths occurred at the patients’ homes, with only two in residential or nursing homes.
20. I have concluded that Dr Banks’ prior knowledge of, and respect for, Shipman made him
an unsuitable person to carry out the task of examining the medical records. It is
unfortunate that he did not recognise that fact. Because he approached the records on
the basis that all would be normal, his search for the ‘common features’ was superficial.
When he realised that not every feature of concern was present in the circumstances of
all the deaths (an expectation which was illogical, had he paused to consider it), Dr Banks
erroneously concluded that there was no ‘pattern’ to be found. He failed to see the unusual
features which characterised many of the deaths. If he did notice anything which struck
him as odd, he immediately found an innocent explanation for it. He approached his
examination of the records in the belief that there would be no cause for concern and was
simply unable to open his mind to the possibility that Shipman might have harmed a
patient. He failed to appreciate the potential significance of the fact that Shipman was not
referring deaths to the coroner which he himself believed should have been referred.
21. In mitigation of his failures, I accept that Dr Banks was not given all the information he
could and should have been given. In particular, he was not told about the comparative
death rates of the Brooke Practice and Shipman’s practice. I think there is a real possibility
that, if Dr Banks had been fully informed, his mind might have not been quite so tightly
closed against the possibility of Shipman’s guilt.
22. If DI Smith had received all 31 copy death certificates from the Tameside register office
and Dr Banks had been made aware of most or all of them, the chance that he would have
realised that the death rate among Shipman’s patients was abnormal would have been
increased. The additional records which would have been available for Dr Banks to
examine contained a number of unusual features which tended to support the concerns
that had been raised. However, I cannot say with confidence that Dr Banks would have
realised the significance of this additional material even had he seen it. It is possible that
he would have done so and would have expressed real concern to DI Smith but I cannot
say that it is probable that this would have happened.
23. DI Smith was indeed reassured by what Dr Banks told him. I am satisfied that the receipt
of Dr Banks’ opinion effectively marked the end of this investigation.
The Dukinfield Crematorium
24. Nevertheless, later on 1st April 1998, DI Smith visited the Dukinfield crematorium. Whilst
there, he asked no questions about the system of cremation certification. He failed to
discover the fact that the crematorium held a bundle of certificates for each cremation
which contained information supplied by the certifying (Form B) doctor about the
circumstances of death. He did not look at the cremation register as he should have done.
5
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
Had he looked, he would have found that the name of the certifying doctor appeared in
the record of each death. Had DI Smith looked back over the previous six months, he
would have found entries for the 11 deaths of which he was at that time unaware. Also,
because he asked no questions about cremation procedures, he remained unaware of the
existence and role of the crematorium medical referee. He therefore lost the opportunity
to interview Dr Betty Hinchliffe, Medical Referee at the crematorium. It is fair to say,
however, that, if he had interviewed her, he would have received an assurance that
Shipman always completed his Forms B satisfactorily and that his patients’ deaths gave
rise to no ground for suspicion.
Masseys
25. DI Smith also ascertained that nine of the funerals had been dealt with by Masseys; in
discussion with Mr Michael Gurney, Senior Registrar at the crematorium, he came to the
(correct) conclusion that the unidentified female undertaker of whom Dr Reynolds had
spoken was Mrs Bambroffe, formerly Miss Deborah Massey.
26. On 2nd April 1998, Mrs Bambroffe’s father, Mr Alan Massey, had been to see Shipman in
his surgery. Initially, when Mrs Bambroffe and her husband, David, had voiced their
concerns to Mr Massey, he did not share them. He was further reassured by a
conversation which he had with Dr Alastair MacGillivray, of the Brooke Practice, which
probably took place towards the end of February 1998. However, Mr Massey and his
family have said that, by the end of March or the beginning of April, Mr Massey himself was
concerned about the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients and the circumstances
surrounding those deaths. He wanted to seek an explanation from Shipman and therefore
decided to make an appointment to see him.
27. At that time, Mrs Bambroffe was aware that her concerns and those of the Brooke Practice
doctors had been reported to the Coroner. It is likely that she had been told that the police
had been informed; certainly she would have known that, given the involvement of the
Coroner, the police might well be involved also. I am satisfied that, by 2nd April, she had
told her father of the report to the Coroner and that he too was probably aware that the
police would also be involved.
28. In my judgement, Mr Massey went to see Shipman because he thought that, with the report
to the Coroner, things had ‘gone too far’ and that Shipman should know what was being
said about him. At the time he went, I have no doubt that Mr Massey was convinced that
Shipman had done nothing wrong. I am satisfied that he did not intend to ‘tip off’ Shipman.
Nor do I think that he went so far as to tell Shipman that there had been a report to the
Coroner. I believe that he gave Shipman to understand that people were talking about the
number of deaths among his patients and to make plain that he himself did not share the
suspicions which were being voiced by others. Shipman’s response was to produce his
book of Medical Certificate of Cause of Death counterfoils and show Mr Massey various
names and causes of death. He told Mr Massey that the book was available for inspection
by ‘anybody concerned’. He was relaxed, confident and apparently unconcerned by the
deeply distressing (to an innocent person) gossip which was circulating about him.
Mr Massey was entirely reassured by Shipman’s response, although he had, of course,
not received the explanation he claimed to have sought.
6
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
29. The effect of Mr Massey’s visit was to alert Shipman to the fact that he was under suspicion,
possibly even under investigation. I think the consequence was that Shipman stopped
killing for a time before resuming and killing his last three victims on 11th May, 12th June
and 24th June 1998. In my judgement, Mr Massey’s action in speaking to Shipman did not
lead to any loss of life and may indeed have saved lives. I am sure that he acted with good
intentions when he went to see Shipman. His mistake was that he trusted, admired and
respected Shipman and could not believe that the suspicions harboured by his daughter
and the Brooke Practice doctors could have any foundation. I think he has found it very
hard, indeed impossible, to accept that this was once his state of mind.
30. About two weeks after Mr Massey’s visit to Shipman, probably on 15th April 1998, DI Smith
met Mr and Mrs Bambroffe and Mr Massey. DI Smith confirmed that Mrs Bambroffe was
the undertaker who had expressed concerns to the Brooke Practice doctors. He told
Mrs Bambroffe of Dr Reynolds’ concerns, as related to him, and of what he had done to
investigate them. He asked Mrs Bambroffe if she had anything to add. His manner was
reassuring and he gave the impression that he had made a thorough investigation and
found nothing untoward. The family got the impression that the investigation was
approaching its conclusion. DI Smith did not ask Mrs Bambroffe to elaborate upon her
concerns, nor did he seek information about the deaths which she and other members of
the family had attended. He did not seek access to the records kept by Masseys. Had he
done all these things, he would have elicited a great deal of information, including the fact
that there were five deaths dealt with by Masseys during the preceding six months, of
which he was unaware. This meeting was not an evidence-gathering exercise; rather, the
interview consisted of DI Smith imparting information. I can well understand, given the
nature of the meeting and DI Smith’s attitude, why Mrs Bambroffe did not feel able to
repeat and expand upon the concerns which she had previously expressed. By the end
of the meeting, DI Smith had learned nothing new.
The End of the Investigation
31. At about this time, DI Smith discussed the investigation with CS Sykes and it was agreed
that it should be closed. There was no detailed discussion of the evidence collected by
DI Smith and he submitted no written report. In effect, CS Sykes delegated the decision
to close the investigation to DI Smith.
32. During the course of the investigation, DI Smith had made no check on the Police National
Computer to ascertain whether or not Shipman had any previous convictions. He said that
he forgot to do so. I doubt that he forgot and think it more likely that he thought his search
of the Greater Manchester Police Integrated Computer System would be adequate,
because a man like Shipman would not have any criminal convictions. Had he enquired,
he would have discovered that Shipman had previous convictions for drug offences
involving dishonesty, committed in the early 1970s. DI Smith claimed that, even had he
known about Shipman’s criminal record, it would not have affected his view of Shipman.
I do not accept that assertion. Of course, the knowledge that Shipman had past drugs
convictions would not immediately have led to the conclusion that he was killing his
patients. However, when considered with Dr Reynolds’ suggestion that Shipman might be
7
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
killing his patients by giving them some sort of drug, knowledge of his convictions would
have raised the index of suspicion of any reasonable police officer.
33. On 16th April 1998, DI Smith visited Dr Reynolds and told her that he had found no
evidence to confirm her suspicions. I am satisfied that he mentioned the apparent
absence of motive; Dr Reynolds was disappointed at the emphasis on this aspect of the
enquiry as she was concerned, not about motive, but about the disparity in death rates
between the two practices. DI Smith gave no explanation for that disparity; he was not in
a position to do so.
34. On 17th April 1998, DI Smith spoke to Mr Pollard by telephone. He mentioned the fact that
he had had medical records examined; two sets had been ‘questioned’ but there had
been nothing that ‘gave any indication of any criminal acts‘. He had ‘inspected’ the
‘cremation records’ of 20 people and seen the female undertaker of whom Mr Pollard had
been told. He informed Mr Pollard that Shipman tried to get all his patients out of hospital
and visited them without prior appointment. Mr Pollard accepted what was said and did
not think deeply about it or question whether the proffered explanation could satisfactorily
account for the startling disparity between the death rates. He did not take any steps to
discover whether Dr Reynolds was satisfied with the result of the investigation. He
accepted that the police enquiry had revealed nothing of concern and put the whole
matter out of his mind. Thus ended the March 1998 police investigation.
Conclusions
Chief Superintendent David Sykes
35. The Inquiry was told that DI Smith, although an experienced detective, was not
accustomed to working without direction and supervision. CS Sykes should have known
that or, if he did not, he should have discovered it. He should have instructed a suitably
experienced detective officer to undertake this unusual and potentially serious
investigation. He should have realised also that he himself did not have the necessary
experience to direct and supervise the investigation. He should have consulted Detective
Superintendent Bernard Postles (now Detective Chief Superintendent Postles) who would
have advised as to the appropriate level of seniority to which the concerns should be
reported. I am satisfied that, had that been done, a properly directed investigation would
have taken place.
36. Once the investigation was under way, CS Sykes failed to recognise that DI Smith was out
of his depth. He failed to discuss the issues with DI Smith in any detail. If he had done so,
he would have realised the extent of DI Smith’s lack of understanding. He should not have
left it to DI Smith to decide whether and when the investigation was to be closed. If, even
at that stage, he had asked a senior detective officer to scrutinise the information that DI
Smith had gathered, the outcome would have been different.
Detective Inspector David Smith
37. DI Smith himself made many mistakes in the course of the investigation. Some of those
were the result of his lack of experience of criminal investigations of a non-routine nature.
8
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
He was wrong to continue with his investigation, pretending that he knew what he was
doing when, as he admitted in evidence, he did not know ‘where to go’. He should have
sought the advice of a senior detective officer. As a consequence of his failure to seek
advice, he never understood the issues, never had a plan of action, had no one to help
him analyse the information he received, had no one to make suggestions as to the
information he should seek from the available witnesses and was allowed to close the
investigation before it was complete. However, he should have had, without needing to
ask for it, the benefit of supervision by a senior detective officer. In addition, he was not
assisted by the poor advice which he received from Dr Banks, nor by the failure on the
part of the Tameside register office to provide him with a complete bundle of copy death
certificates.
38. Although I do not consider that DI Smith is primarily responsible for the failure of the
investigation, in two respects his inaction contributed directly to the adverse result. The
first was his failure to collect detailed information from Dr Reynolds and the second was his
failure to report to the Coroner the fact that the bodies of Mrs Lily Higgins and
Miss Ada Warburton were available for autopsy if the Coroner thought fit to order one.
39. In addition, DI Smith’s lack of frankness about his part in the investigation merits strong
criticism. In the various accounts of his investigation given to the police, he consistently
sought to attribute its failure to the fault of others. He told lies in those accounts and
repeated some of those lies in statements made to this Inquiry. In oral evidence, he told
the truth about some matters, for which he deserves credit. However, he has continued to
the end to lie about the circumstances in which he learned of the death of Miss Warburton.
He did so in an attempt to evade responsibility for his failure to arrange an autopsy on
her body.
Dr Alan Banks
40. In my judgement, Dr Banks must also bear some responsibility for the failure of the
investigation, although I consider that his contribution is substantially less than that of
CS Sykes and DI Smith. I have already referred to the inadequacies of his examination of
the medical records and to the fact that he was unable to open his mind to the possibility
that Shipman might have killed his patients or even that he might have given them
substandard care. That mindset would have been excusable if he had not known that the
reason why the police were making enquiries was because a concern had arisen that
Shipman might be killing his patients. I accept that Dr Banks’ knowledge of, and respect
for, Shipman made it even more difficult for him to have an open mind. The ‘credibility gap’
amounts to mitigation for Dr Banks’ failures, but cannot provide an excuse in the case of
a professional man asked for his professional opinion.
A Different Outcome?
41. Had CS Sykes put the investigation in the hands of a more senior detective officer, one
who had experience of devising and supervising a criminal investigation, and if that officer
had acted with reasonable expedition, the whole course of the investigation would, in my
view, have been very different. I think it likely that the opportunity would have been taken
9
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
to conduct an autopsy, with toxicological tests, on the body of Miss Warburton or of
Mrs Martha Marley, of whose death on 24th March 1998 DI Smith remained ignorant
throughout the investigation. Had that been done, morphine would have been found, an
inquest would have been ordered and Shipman would have come to learn that he was
under suspicion. I do not think he would have killed any more patients after that.
42. Even if the opportunity for an autopsy had been lost then, I believe that, in due course,
suspicions would have been such that the police would have applied for an exhumation
and autopsy, with toxicological tests. It is probable that, by that time, concerns would have
arisen about the death of Mrs Bianka Pomfret, and that her body would have been
exhumed. Morphine would have been found. It would not have been long before Shipman
became aware of the investigation and I do not think he would have killed again.
43. Although I cannot be certain of this, I think that, if the police and the Coroner had moved
with reasonable expedition, the lives of Shipman’s last three victims would probably have
been saved.
44. If CS Sykes had initially instructed DI Smith to carry out the investigation but had
subsequently discovered that he was out of his depth, then it is more difficult to say what
the probable outcome would have been. It would depend on how much time had elapsed
before the discovery was made and the investigation was put into the hands of a more
senior detective officer. Plainly, the later the change of officer in charge, the poorer the
chance that Shipman would have been stopped before he killed again.
The Greater Manchester Police
45. At an early stage in the later police investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, it
was discovered that there was no written report about the March 1998 investigation.
Subsequently, DI Smith submitted two written reports, setting out details of the
investigation. I have found that, in those reports, he sought to diminish the seriousness of
Dr Reynolds’ original concerns and to suggest that Dr Banks had raised no concerns
whatever about the medical records. Clearly, DI Smith was seeking to deflect possible
criticism of his conduct of the investigation. By the end of 1998, the GMP had good reason
to suspect Shipman of being a serial killer, whom the first police investigation had failed
to detect. The potential for criticism of the Force was recognised. Nevertheless, on the
basis of DI Smith’s reports alone, senior officers in the GMP concluded that the March
1998 investigation had been ‘appropriate at that time‘.
46. Immediately after Shipman’s conviction, it was announced that there would be an Inquiry
into the Shipman affair, including the first, failed police investigation. In preparation for the
Inquiry, Detective Superintendent (Det Supt) Peter Ellis was instructed to prepare a
‘comprehensive document’ recording, as accurately as possible, a detailed account of
the March 1998 investigation. The document was prepared following interviews with
CS Sykes and DI Smith. The account given by DI Smith to Det Supt Ellis was different in a
number of respects from his oral evidence to the Inquiry. Most notably, he told
Det Supt Ellis that Dr Reynolds had at no time said that she suspected that Shipman was
killing his patients. That was in contrast to his oral evidence to the Inquiry. In general, the
account given to Det Supt Ellis, like DI Smith’s previous reports, tended to minimise the
10
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
seriousness of the concerns being expressed and excused DI Smith’s failure to find
evidence to substantiate those concerns.
47. Having recorded DI Smith’s account of the investigation, Det Supt Ellis then proceeded to
make a series of ‘observations’, all of which had the effect of exculpating DI Smith. He
excused DI Smith’s failure to ascertain whether Shipman had previous convictions. He
criticised Dr Reynolds and Mrs Bambroffe in a number of respects without querying the
account he had been given. He emphasised the limitations placed on the investigations
by the constraints of confidentiality. His conclusions echoed the view previously
expressed by senior members of the Force that the investigation was ‘appropriate at the
time‘. He pointed out the potential for criticism in DI Smith’s failure to keep records of his
enquiries but mitigated this by suggesting that written records might have been kept if any
evidence supporting the suspicions had come to light.
48. Det Supt Ellis should not have been given the task of preparing the report, which should
have been written by a more senior officer. He was not in a position to investigate the
actions of CS Sykes, still less form a judgement about his supervision of the investigation.
He was heavily influenced by the views of more senior officers, of which he was aware.
Nevertheless, Det Supt Ellis’ report was accepted by senior officers in the GMP, who
maintained their view that DI Smith’s investigation had been as thorough as possible. After
the report had been submitted to this Inquiry, the witness statements submitted by officers
of the GMP continued to reflect the same view.
49. On the first day of the Inquiry hearings of the evidence relating to the March 1998 police
investigation, it was conceded on behalf of the GMP that the March investigation had been
seriously flawed in a number of respects. That conclusion was prompted by a review of
the investigation which was then being carried out by Detective Chief Superintendent
(DCS) Peter Stelfox; that review constituted a careful, detailed and objective analysis of
the evidence relating to the first investigation. DCS Stelfox was deeply critical of DI Smith
for his conduct of the investigation and of CS Sykes for his failure properly to direct and
supervise it.
50. In my view, the GMP should not have waited until 2002 to undertake a searching enquiry
into the failure of the first investigation. It should have been carried out in late 1998 or early
1999. Instead, over a period of more than three years, they accepted DI Smith’s own
account and subjected it to no critical analysis whatsoever. On discovering that DI Smith
had not made any proper record of an investigation that was known to have failed, I do not
think that continued unquestioning confidence in his veracity should have been
maintained. I am driven to the conclusion that, had it not been for the Shipman Inquiry, the
GMP would never have made any more thorough enquiry into the matter than had been
carried out by Det Supt Ellis. However, once DCS Stelfox had investigated, they accepted
his conclusions without reservation. The gravity of their earlier failure to face up to the
shortcomings of the first investigation is to some extent mitigated by that fact and by my
recognition that the natural instinct of individuals and organisations is to seek to avoid
criticism where possible.
Final Thoughts
51. I must and do feel sympathy for those few who have been found responsible for the failure
of this investigation. They must live with that responsibility for the rest of their lives.
11
SHIP02$$$7 13-05-03 11:03:12 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PSUM Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
Although their predicament was of their own making, it should be recognised that it was
their misfortune ever to be caught up in the consequences of Shipman’s criminality. There
must be many others who would also have failed if put in the position in which these men
found themselves.
52. My final word must be for the families of Shipman’s last three victims. For them, these
hearings and the reading of this Report will have been profoundly distressing. Once again,
I can only offer them my deepest sympathy.
12
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER ONE
Concerns Are Raised
Introduction
1.1 As is now well known, on 31st January 2000, Harold Fredrick Shipman was convicted of
the murder of 15patients and of forging the will of one of them. His trial was the culmination
of an investigation which began in July 1998, when Mrs Angela Woodruff reported to the
police that she suspected that a will had been forged in the name of her mother,
Mrs Kathleen Grundy, who had been found dead on 24th June 1998. Under the will,
Shipman was the sole beneficiary of Mrs Grundy’s estate. Shipman fell under suspicion of
forgery. Soon afterwards, Mrs Grundy’s body was exhumed and morphine was found in
the tissues. On 7th September 1998, Shipman was arrested and charged with the murder
of Mrs Grundy and with other offences associated with the forgery of her will. The police
investigation widened to include the deaths of other patients of Shipman who had died
suddenly and unexpectedly. Fifteen deaths (including that of Mrs Grundy) were, in due
course, selected for charge and trial. In 2001, this Inquiry embarked on the task of
discovering the full extent of Shipman’s criminal activities. In July 2002, I reported that he
had killed at least 215patients.
1.2 The investigation that began in July 1998 was not the first occasion on which the police
had looked into the possibility of criminal conduct by Shipman. On 24th March 1998,
Dr Linda Reynolds, a general practitioner and principal at the Brooke Practice, 20 Market
Street, Hyde, reported to Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner for the Greater Manchester South
District (‘the Coroner’), her concerns about the number of Shipman’s patients who were
dying and about the circumstances of their deaths. At the request of the Coroner, a
confidential investigation was carried out by the Greater Manchester Police (GMP or ‘the
Force’). That investigation was conducted by Detective Inspector (DI) David Smith under
the supervision of Chief Superintendent (CS) David Sykes. At the end of it, DI Smith
concluded that there was no substance in the doctor’s concerns. He communicated his
view to Dr Reynolds and to the Coroner and there the matter rested.
1.3 After the closure of that first investigation, Shipman killed three more patients before his
arrest. They were Mrs Winifred Mellor, who died on 11th May 1998, Mrs Joan Melia, who
died on 12th June 1998 and Mrs Grundy, whom he killed on 24th June 1998. Following
Shipman’s trial, questions arose about the thoroughness with which the earlier police
investigation had been carried out and whether or not, if it had been conducted differently,
Shipman’s course of killing could have been stopped earlier and the lives of three of his
victims saved.
1.4 In the course of hearings which took place between May and July 2002, the Inquiry
conducted a detailed examination of the March 1998 police investigation. The Inquiry
considered the parts played, not only by DI Smith and CS Sykes, but by all those who
contributed to the investigation. They included the Coroner who reported Dr Reynolds’
concerns to the police, the registrars who provided information about the deaths of
Shipman’s patients and Dr Alan Banks, Medical Adviser to the West Pennine Health
Authority (WPHA or ‘the Health Authority’), who examined the dead patients’ medical
13
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
records. This Second Report records my findings as to what occurred during this
investigation and provides my opinion as to whether or not, in performing their duties, the
conduct of the various public servants involved fell below the standard which the public
is entitled to expect.
The Dangers of Hindsight
1.5From the outset, the Inquiry recognised the need to look at events in the light of what was
known at the time. We now know that Shipman was a serial murderer who, over the course
of 23 years, killed at least 215patients. To those involved in March 1998, however,
Shipman was a well-respected general practitioner with a reputation for giving his patients
a high standard of care. It cannot have been easy for those involved in the first
investigation to give serious consideration to the idea that Shipman might be killing his
patients.
1.6 As the daughter of Mrs Grundy, Mrs Woodruff has particular reason to wish that the March
1998 investigation had been successful in revealing Shipman’s criminality. If it had been,
her mother might have been alive today. Yet, in her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Woodruff
said this:
‘I ... understand extremely well from my own experience ... just how
difficult it was to believe that an especially respected GP could have
deliberately murdered his own healthy patients. I can also understand
how difficult it would be to find any clear evidence for any wrongdoing
without access to Dr Shipman’s actual patient records (complete with
the computer audit trail) and/or discussing the circumstances of deaths
with the patients’ relative [sic]. There is little doubt that such enquiries
would have come to the notice of Dr Shipman himself and quite possibly
the media ... Whilst I believe that it is appropriate to establish exactly
what did happen in this earlier enquiry, I do feel that the events must be
judged on the basis of the circumstances at the time and not with the
benefit of hindsight.’
1.7 Mrs Woodruff is right. It would be quite unfair to criticise any person for a failure of duty if
that failure were to be considered with the benefit of hindsight.
Death Registration and Cremation Certification
1.8 A brief explanation of the systems of death registration and cremation certification must
now be given. A fuller explanation was provided in Chapter Five of the First Report.
1.9 When a person dies at home in circumstances that are not obviously suspicious, the usual
procedure is for the general practitioner to be informed. That doctor decides whether
s/he can certify the cause of death or whether the death should be reported to the coroner.
1.10 If the doctor is confident that s/he knows the cause of death, s/he will sign a certificate
known as the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). MCCDs are supplied in a
book rather like a large cheque book. When a doctor has completed a certificate, s/he
14
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
tears it out of the book. S/he is then left with a counterfoil in the book, on which s/he records
details of the certificate s/he has completed.
1.11 Usually, the doctor hands the completed MCCD to the person (most frequently a relative
of the deceased) who is to be responsible for registering the death. That person takes the
certificate to the register office. If all is in order, the registrar will register the death. The
same procedure is followed if a death occurs in hospital; the doctor signing the MCCD will,
in those circumstances, usually be a hospital doctor.
1.12 In some circumstances laid down by statute, or if the doctor is not confident that s/he
knows the cause of death, the case is reported to the coroner. Usually, there is then a full
invasive examination of the internal organs (known as an autopsy or post-mortem
examination), after which the coroner might issue a burial order or cremation certificate to
allow disposal of the body without an inquest. Sometimes, s/he will formally open and
adjourn an inquest before permitting disposal.
1.13 The deceased person’s own doctor will sign an MCCD (or ‘certify the death’, as it is
colloquially known) only when the deceased has died outside hospital and when the death
has not been formally reported to the coroner. As a very rough guide, 60% of all deaths
occur in hospital and, of the remaining 40% that occur in the community, about a quarter
are reported to the coroner. So, on average, for every 100 patient deaths, a general
practitioner will certify the cause of only about 30.
1.14 The proportion of deaths followed by cremation has increased steadily over recent years
and is now about 70%. The procedure for obtaining authority to cremate a body starts with
the completion of the Application for Cremation (Form A) by the person seeking the
cremation, usually the deceased’s nearest relative. The Certificate of Medical Attendant
(Form B) must then be completed by a doctor who has attended the deceased before
death and has seen and identified the body after death. For deaths out of hospital, Form
B is usually completed by the general practitioner who has issued the MCCD. Because
only about 70% of bodies are cremated, it follows that the general practitioner will sign
fewer Forms B than MCCDs. So, for every 100 patient deaths, a general practitioner will
expect to sign about 30 MCCDs and, in about 21 of those deaths, he will also sign a
cremation Form B.
1.15The Confirmatory Medical Certificate (Form C) must be completed by a second doctor
who is neither a relative of the deceased nor a relative or partner of the Form B doctor.
Form C requires the doctor completing it to have seen and ‘carefully examined’ the body
of the deceased and to have seen and questioned the Form B doctor about the death. The
usual practice is for the first doctor (the Form B doctor) to speak to the second doctor,
either face to face or by telephone, and to explain the circumstances of the death and any
relevant medical history. The first doctor then either hands the completed Form B to the
second doctor or leaves it at the funeral director’s premises, where the second doctor
goes to examine the body and complete Form C.
1.16 At the end of Form C, the second doctor states what s/he believes to have been the cause
of death and goes on to certify that:
‘... I knowof no reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased died
either a violent or an unnatural death or a sudden death of which the
15
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
cause is unknown or died in such place or circumstances as to require
an inquest in pursuance of any Act.’
1.17 The relatives of the deceased pay fees to the doctors who complete Forms B and C. Forms
A, B and C are then sent to the crematorium, where they are examined by a medical
referee. The medical referee is a doctor, who works part-time at the crematorium and
whose responsibility it is to ensure that the forms have been properly completed and that
the cause of death has been ‘definitely ascertained’. If so satisfied, the medical referee
signs the Authority to Cremate (Form F), which is the final step in the process of obtaining
authority to cremate the body.
Shipman’s Arrangements for the Signing of Cremation Forms C
1.18 It is not uncommon for neighbouring practices to develop reciprocal arrangements for the
completion of Forms C. Shipman began to practise single-handed from his own premises
at 21 Market Street, Hyde, in August 1992. His departure from the Donneybrook Practice
had been acrimonious. Not long after he set up alone, a group of doctors from the
Clarendon House Practice (which had shared a building with the Donneybrook Practice)
moved to premises at 20 Market Street, directly opposite Shipman’s surgery. Their
practice became known as the Brooke Practice. Soon afterwards, an informal
arrangement was made between the two practices for the provision of mutual support and
assistance, as and when necessary. In particular, Dr Alastair MacGillivray, Dr Jeremy
Dirckze and Dr Susan Booth regularly asked Shipman to sign cremation Forms C for their
patients and Shipman would almost invariably ask the Brooke Practice doctors to sign his.
1.19 The Brooke Practice kept a record of the Forms C signed by the partners. That record
shows that, between September 1993 and September 1998, all but five of the Forms C
signed by members of the practice related to the deaths of Shipman’s patients. This
demonstrates that the Brooke Practice was not providing a regular service for signing
Forms C to any doctor other than Shipman.
Concerns at the Brooke Practice
Dr Reynolds’ Observations
1.20 Dr Reynolds joined the Brooke Practice on 1st September 1996. The existing partners were
Dr MacGillivray, Dr Dirckze, Dr Booth and Dr Rajesh Patel. Dr Reynolds had previously
been a principal in a general practice in Reddish, Stockport, for a period of 19 years. As
I have already indicated, she was to play an important role in the events surrounding the
first police investigation. Sadly, she died in March 2000, not long after Shipman’s
conviction. Before her death, she provided statements of her evidence to the police and
had also written a statement for distribution to members of the press, who were anxious to
interview her at a time when she was extremely ill. For her account of events, the Inquiry
has relied on those written statements and also on the recollections of her widower,
Mr Nigel Reynolds. It is clear that Dr Reynolds told her husband a great deal about her
concerns and he has a good recollection of the events of early 1998. He was a most careful
16
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
witness and I have no hesitation in accepting his evidence, notwithstanding its hearsay
nature.
1.21 In the months following her appointment at the Brooke Practice, Dr Reynolds began to
notice that she was asked to sign a cremation Form C rather more often than she had been
accustomed to do at her former practice. Also, when reading the Forms B completed by
Shipman, which gave details about the circumstances of the deaths, she noticed that, on
several occasions, he had been present at the death. Dr Reynolds realised that this was
odd since, in her experience, the presence of a doctor at the death of a patient was
unusual; it had happened to her only two or three times in 19 years of practice. Towards
the end of 1997, she mentioned this apparent oddity to her partners but was assured that
Shipman had a lot of elderly patients and was well known as a doctor who would visit his
patients unannounced when he was concerned about their condition, so his presence at
their deaths was not surprising. She remained conscious of the frequency with which she
was asked to complete a Form C for Shipman and still felt it was unusual for a general
practitioner to be present at a patient’s death.
1.22 None of the other Brooke Practice doctors had observed anything odd about the
circumstances of the deaths of Shipman’s patients. Dr Patel had noticed that Shipman had
been present at the time of at least one of the deaths for which he was asked to sign a Form
C. Dr Patel raised this with Shipman, who replied that younger doctors these days did not
visit their patients in the same way that old-fashioned doctors like himself did. He said that
he tried to keep his patients at home to allow them to die with dignity rather than allow them
to have an ‘undignified end’ in the hustle and bustle of an unfriendly hospital. He put
Dr Patel firmly in his place, implying that the old ways were best and that doctors who
visited at home were providing a better standard of care for their patients than their
younger colleagues. Dr Patel accepted Shipman’s explanation.
Mrs Bambroffe Voices her Concerns
1.23 On 23rd February 1998, Dr Booth visited the premises of Frank Massey and Son, Funeral
Directors (Masseys), to complete a Form C in respect of Miss Maureen Ward. On that
occasion, Mrs Deborah Bambroffe (nee Massey), who worked in the family business
together with her father, Mr Alan Massey, and her husband, Mr David Bambroffe, told
Dr Booth that she was concerned about the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients,
compared with those among the patients of other doctors. According to Dr Booth,
Mrs Bambroffe also said that she was concerned about some unusual features of the
deaths; the worrying deaths were of elderly women who had died at home, apparently
alone, and had been found sitting up in a chair, fully dressed. They did not appear to have
been ill. This was unusual, in Mrs Bambroffe’s experience. She was more accustomed to
finding that the death had occurred while the person was in bed and surrounded by the
paraphernalia of illness. Usually in such cases, a relative or friend was present. In cases
of sudden death, Mrs Bambroffe was accustomed to seeing the deceased person on the
floor or showing some other sign of a sudden collapse. Mrs Bambroffe had also noticed
that Shipman often seemed to be present at or shortly after the death; she had sometimes
wondered how he had gained access to the premises. Mrs Bambroffe wanted to discuss
17
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
her concerns with one of the Brooke Practice doctors but was afraid that her concerns
would not be taken seriously. She chose Dr Booth as the most approachable.
1.24 Dr Booth promised Mrs Bambroffe that she would discuss her concerns with the other
members of the Brooke Practice. As soon as Dr Booth returned to the surgery, she told
Dr Patel about her conversation with Mrs Bambroffe. They decided that they would
discuss what Dr Booth had been told with the other partners. Whether they did so
immediately is not clear. Dr Reynolds was away on holiday at the time. It seems likely that
the matter was mentioned to Dr MacGillivray and Dr Dirckze. A few days later,
Dr MacGillivray attended at Masseys’ premises and spoke to Mr Massey, who was aware
that his daughter, Mrs Bambroffe, was worried about the deaths of some of Shipman’s
patients. Dr MacGillivray had known Shipman for a very long time and held him in high
regard. He believed that Shipman liked to keep his elderly patients at home, rather than
have them admitted to hospital. He also believed that Shipman had a large number of
elderly patients on his list. To him, there seemed to be a perfectly rational explanation for
the large number of Shipman’s elderly female patients who, as Mrs Bambroffe had
observed, died in their own homes. Dr MacGillivray gave Mr Massey his opinion about
Shipman and Mr Massey passed it on to his daughter, who felt reassured to some extent.
Dr Reynolds and Dr Booth Speak
1.25At about this time, Dr Reynolds began to feel increased concern about the frequency with
which she was asked to complete a Form C for Shipman. She mentioned her concerns to
Dr Booth. Dr Booth told her that Mrs Bambroffe had spoken of her similar concerns.
According to both Dr Booth and Dr Reynolds, they visited Mrs Bambroffe and discussed
their joint concerns. Mrs Bambroffe has no recollection of this meeting. Dr Booth says that,
on this occasion, Mrs Bambroffe repeated to Dr Reynolds much of what she had
previously said to Dr Booth. The two doctors agreed that the circumstances described by
Mrs Bambroffe were unusual and worrying. Mr Reynolds also recalled his wife telling him
of this meeting. Mr Massey (who, if the meeting took place, was not present) thinks that
such a meeting occurred, as he recalls hearing about it. There is no doubt that such a
meeting took place. However, I am uncertain whether it occurred at this stage of events,
as the doctors recall. The issue is not of great importance. I am satisfied that, at some
stage, Dr Reynolds learned of Mrs Bambroffe’s concerns and shared the view that the
circumstances in which Mrs Bambroffe had seen the bodies of Shipman’s patients were
unusual and worrying. Combined with her own observations about the frequency of
deaths among Shipman’s patients and of his presence at or around the time of death,
Mrs Bambroffe’s concerns served to heighten those of Dr Reynolds.
The Practice Meeting
1.26 As a result of the discussions between themselves (with or without Mrs Bambroffe),
Dr Reynolds and Dr Booth decided that they must discuss their concerns with their
partners. A practice meeting took place in a public house in Heaton Moor, near Stockport,
and was attended by all the partners save Dr MacGillivray.
1.27 When they first gave statements to the Inquiry, the doctors believed that this meeting
probably took place in the week beginning 9th March 1998. Eventually, they suggested
18
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
that it must have taken place in the following week. Also, the doctors recalled that, at that
meeting, they were able to compare the number of Forms C that they had signed for
Shipman during the previous year or so with the number of their own patients for whom
they had completed MCCDs during that period. I accept that the meeting probably took
place during the week beginning 16th March but, for reasons that will become apparent,
I do not think that the comparative figures were then available.
1.28 It appears to me that an important factor in raising the level of Dr Reynolds’ concern was
Shipman’s request that she should sign a cremation Form C in respect of Mrs Lily Higgins,
who died on Tuesday, 17th March 1998. [My decision in respect of her death is in Volume
Four of my First Report. I found that Shipman had killed her.] Dr Reynolds signed the Form
C on Thursday, 19th March. I am satisfied that, having signed that form, Dr Reynolds was
worried about whether she should have done so. Mr Reynolds recalled a time at which his
wife became extremely worried about the Shipman situation and said that they talked
‘round and round’ the topic. Dr Reynolds was wondering what she ought to do.
Mr Reynolds said that he asked her whether she really thought it possible that Shipman
might be killing his patients. At first, she replied, ‘No’, then, after a few moments, she said,
‘No, I know he is killing his patients.’ I think this conversation probably took place soon after
Dr Reynolds had signed Mrs Higgins’ Form C. I think it spurred Dr Reynolds into action
and that the practice meeting followed shortly afterwards. I think it likely that the practice
meeting took place on either Thursday, 19th March or Friday, 20th March. However, the
date is not crucial.
1.29 At the meeting, the Brooke Practice doctors discussed the concerns about the number of
Shipman’s elderly patients who had died in recent months. They were also concerned
about the common features that Mrs Bambroffe had noticed. Although all the doctors
present were concerned to some degree, some were less so. Some thought that Shipman
had a large list with many elderly patients and so could be expected to have more patient
deaths. It was pointed out that he favoured nursing patients at home rather than admitting
them to hospital. However, there was also a discussion about the possibility that Shipman
might be killing patients, either intentionally or unintentionally by negligence. The doctors
debated what, if anything, they should do about their concerns. Dr Reynolds was the most
seriously worried of the four. She was able to draw on her previous experience in another
practice. She had a strong feeling that something was wrong and was anxious to take
some action. Eventually, it was agreed that Dr Reynolds would communicate the concerns
of members of the practice to the coroner, having first sought advice from the Medical
Defence Union (MDU).
Dr Reynolds Takes Action
Discussions with Mrs Bambroffe
1.30 Telephone records show that, on Sunday, 22nd March, Dr Reynolds telephoned Masseys’
premises. I think it likely that she wanted to speak to Mr Massey about her concerns over
Shipman and to tell him that she had decided to make a report. Mr Massey was not
available, as he was away on holiday. The call lasted only 26 seconds. Mrs Bambroffe
remembers taking the call. She told Dr Reynolds that her father was away. On thinking
19
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
about the call afterwards, she realised that Dr Reynolds had probably telephoned in
connection with Shipman. Consequently, two days later, Mrs Bambroffe telephoned
Dr Reynolds to ask why she had wanted to speak to Mr Massey. I shall return to that
telephone call in Chapter Three.
Discussions with the Medical Defence Union
1.31 On Monday, 23rd March, Dr Reynolds telephoned the MDU advice line and spoke to
Dr Susan Gough, who was then a medico-legal adviser to the MDU. Dr Gough’s
contemporaneous note records that Dr Reynolds told her that all five doctors at the Brooke
Practice were concerned at the ‘apparently large’ number of deaths among elderly
patients in Shipman’s practice and that a local undertaker had discussed her concerns
with one of the doctors. I note, in passing, that that would suggest that Dr Reynolds had
not at that time spoken to Mrs Bambroffe. Dr Reynolds mentioned to Dr Gough that she
was concerned that she had recently signed a further Form C for a patient of Shipman’s
(which must have been that for Mrs Higgins). Dr Gough gained the impression that
Dr Reynolds had decided she must take some action and wanted advice as to whether
she should report her concerns to the coroner or to the police. I observe that Dr Gough
did not note that Dr Reynolds told her of the comparative figures for the deaths certified
in the Brooke Practice and the numbers of Forms C signed for Shipman. That suggests to
me that Dr Reynolds was not then in possession of the figures. I say that because, once
she was aware of them, the evidence is that they were uppermost in her mind. That is why
I doubt the doctors’ recollection that the comparative numbers were discussed at the
practice meeting, which, as I have explained, took place before the conversation with
Dr Gough.
1.32 Dr Gough decided to consult with a more senior colleague at the MDU. She agreed to
speak to Dr Reynolds later that day and asked that, in the meantime, Dr Reynolds should
find out the name of the medical referee at the local crematorium and discover when the
funeral/cremation of the recently deceased patient was to take place.
1.33 Dr Gough and Dr Reynolds spoke by telephone again in the late afternoon of the same
day. Dr Gough’s note records that, in the interim, Dr Reynolds had had a discussion with
a local undertaker. From the context, this must have been with Mrs Bambroffe. There is
no record of a telephone call from the Brooke Practice Surgery to Masseys’ premises and
Mrs Bambroffe does not recall meeting Dr Reynolds on that day. However, it is possible
that the meeting was in person. I have considered whether, notwithstanding the
recollections of those concerned to the contrary, the meeting between Dr Booth,
Dr Reynolds and Mrs Bambroffe, described as having occurred some time earlier, in fact
took place on that day.
1.34 According to Dr Gough’s note, it appeared that the undertaker’s concerns were that the
deceased patients were all women and had died without any history of previous illness.
They were often found dead by the doctor, not long after he had paid them a visit at home
‘of his own volition’. They were found fully clothed. This is plainly a description of
Mrs Bambroffe’s concerns. Dr Gough’s note also refers to the fact that most of the bodies
had a grey coloration. In evidence, Mrs Bambroffe agreed that she might have mentioned
20
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
that to the doctors but said that it had not been a cause for concern. Mrs Bambroffe must
have been the undertaker referred to in Dr Gough’s note. I think it likely that the only
meeting between the three women took place on that day. Dr Gough also noted that
Dr Reynolds had discovered that Mrs Higgins’ funeral was to be held on 26th March. In
fact, it was to take place on 25th March and a mistake must have been made by Dr Gough,
Dr Reynolds or the funeral director of whom enquiry was made. Again, there is no
reference to the comparative figures in this second note. I infer that Dr Reynolds still did
not have them. If she had, I am sure she would have mentioned them to Dr Gough.
The Comparative Figures
1.35Dr Reynolds must have resolved to speak to the Coroner on the following day. By the time
she spoke to him, she was certainly in possession of the comparative figures. In my view,
it is probable that the figures were extracted from the surgery records in the late afternoon
or early evening of 23rd March. I think it is likely that Dr Dirckze examined the records to
ascertain how many Forms C the Brooke Practice doctors had signed for Shipman in the
previous months and how many MCCDs they had signed in the same period. However,
although Dr Dirckze agrees he carried out this exercise, he does not believe that he would
have had time to do it on that Monday. He cannot recall exactly how he obtained the
information about the Brooke Practice patients. He believes he might have used the
surgery computer. I think it likely that Dr Dirckze decided to extract the comparative
figures because, on that Monday, 23rd March, Shipman asked him to sign a Form C for
Miss Ada Warburton, who had died on 20th March. [My decision about her death is in
Volume Six of my First Report. I found that Shipman killed her.] This request to sign a Form
C would have raised his own level of concern and alerted him to the availability of the
comparative figures. It is possible that Dr Reynolds also looked at the figures. Certainly,
she made a note of them. Long after her death, her husband found a note, written in her
hand, which appears to be an aide memoire to assist Dr Reynolds in her conversation with
the Coroner. It contains what seems to be a note of the number of deaths of patients at
the Brooke Practice and the number of cremation Forms C signed for Shipman during the
previous three months. It also contains a reference to the death of Miss Warburton and a
brief description of some of the features of the deaths that had given rise to
Mrs Bambroffe’s concerns.
1.36 The figures showed that the Brooke Practice doctors had signed 16 Forms C for Shipman
in the previous three months, including the Form C for Miss Warburton, completed that
day. That number would not include any patients of Shipman who had died in hospital or
who had been buried or whose cause of death had been certified by the coroner. The
Brooke Practice doctors could not accurately estimate the total number of deaths among
Shipman’s patients in that period but realised that, if his practice followed the usual
pattern, it was likely to be much higher than 16. The note showed that either 14 or 15
patients of the Brooke Practice had died in that three-month period. Dr Reynolds had
changed the number written in her note from 14 to 15. This number included deaths that
had occurred both in hospital and in the community, not just deaths where the Brooke
Practice doctors had completed the MCCD. Over the previous year, the Brooke Practice
doctors had completed 16 MCCDs. The Brooke Practice, with five doctors, had a list of
21
SHIP02$$$6 14-04-03 10:02:23 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P001 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
about 9500 patients. The Brooke Practice doctors did not know the size of Shipman’s list
but they knew that he practised alone. They thought he might have about 3000 patients.
Taking these figures together, it would appear that the death rate among Shipman’s
patients was very much higher than that for the Brooke Practice. At the very least, it
appeared to be about three times the Brooke Practice rate and some of the doctors,
including Dr Dirckze, considered that the death rate for Shipman’s practice might be as
much as eight or nine times higher than that of the Brooke Practice. Now that the
comparative figures were available to Dr Reynolds, they were, as will be seen, in the
forefront of her mind.
22
SHIP02$$$8 09-04-03 20:56:16 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER TWO
The Coroner Becomes Involved
Dr Reynolds Informs the Coroner
2.1 Dr Reynolds telephoned the Coroner’s office early in the morning of Tuesday, 24th March,
before Mr Pollard had arrived at work. Mrs Mary Evans, the first coroner’s officer, realised
that Dr Reynolds was very concerned about something. Dr Reynolds telephoned the office
again at about 10.25am. She told Mrs Margaret Blake, the member of staff to whom she
spoke on that occasion, that it was important that she spoke directly to Mr Pollard and was
put through. Mr Pollard made a contemporaneous note of what Dr Reynolds told him. This
note is consistent with his recollection that Dr Reynolds told him that she and her partners
were concerned about the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients. She told him that
she herself had signed a cremation Form C on the previous Thursday. He said that she
also reported that one of the local undertakers was concerned about the deaths of some
elderly female patients who appeared to have been found dead by Shipman. Mr Pollard
noted the figures that Dr Reynolds gave him. He recorded that the Brooke Practice, with
9500 patients, had had 14 patient deaths in three months but that Shipman, who was a
sole practitioner, had signed 16 cremation forms (i.e. Forms B) in the same period. That
this was the first time Dr Reynolds is recorded as having mentioned the comparative
numbers confirms my view that they had only recently come into her possession.
2.2 Mr Pollard said that he understood that Dr Reynolds was concerned about the number of
deaths and also because the patients were found dead at home during the day and
Shipman was often present at the time. Dr Reynolds made it plain to Mr Pollard that she
was concerned that Shipman might be killing his patients. She thought that there were two
possibilities: either Shipman was a very caring doctor (who visited so frequently that he
happened to be with the patient at or shortly before the time of death) or he was killing his
patients. Dr Reynolds wanted the Coroner to investigate her concerns but she asked him
not to disclose her name as the source of the information. She was anxious that the
investigation should be discreet because, if her concerns were unfounded, there would
be an obvious risk to her professional relationship with Shipman should it become known
that she had expressed concerns of such a serious nature about him.
2.3 Mr Pollard told the Inquiry that he understood the nature of Dr Reynolds’ concerns about
the differing death rates. He realised that Shipman’s practice would have had no more
than about 3000 patients. He also understood that Dr Reynolds was drawing a distinction
between cremations and deaths, so that the 16 cremation certificates from Shipman’s
practice would not include those deaths where the bodies had been buried. He seems to
have realised that the 16 cremations would not include any patient of Shipman who had
died in hospital, although I do not think he realised the full potential impact of that factor.
He told the Inquiry that he thought he had appreciated that there might be other deaths
among Shipman’s patients for which the cremation Form C had been signed by a doctor
from a practice other than the Brooke Practice. He did not realise that the 14 deaths from
the Brooke Practice were the total deaths among their 9500 patients, not just the ones for
whom they had signed the MCCD. In fact, they had signed only three MCCDs during the
23
SHIP02$$$8 09-04-03 20:56:16 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
previous three months. In short, Mr Pollard appreciated the fact that there was a disparity
between the numbers for the two practices, but I am not sure that he really understood its
significance. He realised that it appeared that Shipman’s practice had a death rate at least
three times higher than that of the Brooke Practice. He recognised that these concerns
merited prompt action and decided to report them to the police.
2.4 Mr Pollard did not suggest a face to face meeting with Dr Reynolds. On the telephone, he
did not discuss with her the possibility that the cremation of the deceased person for whom
she had completed Form C the previous week might be halted and an autopsy carried
out. He said that Dr Reynolds did not give him the names of either Mrs Lily Higgins or
Miss Ada Warburton, who had very recently died and whose bodies had not yet been
cremated. Certainly he did not note them. He did not ask Dr Reynolds about any specific
deaths. Mr Pollard said that he did not consider that a specific death was being reported
to him and he did not explain to Dr Reynolds that he was not able to initiate an investigation
into a death unless it was formally reported to him and the body was lying within the district
over which he had jurisdiction. He assumed, without asking, that the body of the deceased
person mentioned by Dr Reynolds had already been cremated. He said that, if
Dr Reynolds had mentioned Mrs Higgins by name and had said that she was worried that
the cause of death as certified might not be correct and that the body had not been
cremated, he would have been prepared to order an autopsy. He pointed out, however,
that, had this been done, Shipman would have had to be informed and might well have
realised the source of the report.
2.5 Mr Pollard also said that he assumed that the death mentioned by Dr Reynolds must have
been natural because two doctors had certified the death. This demonstrates that he had
only a superficial understanding of Dr Reynolds’ concerns. If, as Dr Reynolds suspected,
Shipman was killing his patients, one would not have expected that Shipman would certify
that the death had been anything but natural, either on the MCCD or on cremation Form
B. Here was the doctor who had herself signed Form C, saying that she was worried that
Shipman might be killing his patients. It should have been apparent to Mr Pollard that, in
the case of the death for which Dr Reynolds had recently signed Form C, she was
expressing (or at least implying) concern that the cremation certification procedure might
not have provided any protection against concealed homicide. Mr Pollard did not suggest
that, if Dr Reynolds or her partners had any concerns about future requests from Shipman
to sign a Form C, they might wish to contact him.
2.6 Immediately after receiving the telephone call from Dr Reynolds, Mr Pollard went into the
general office and informed his staff (Mrs Evans, Mrs Blake and the second coroner’s
officer at the time, Mrs Joan Collins) what Dr Reynolds had told him and of his intention to
ask the police to investigate. He did not instigate any other enquiry of his own. It did not
occur to him to look in the records held by his own office to see whether they revealed
anything unusual about Shipman. He did not, for example, look to see when Shipman had
last reported a death to him. He agreed that, had he done so, he would have found that
no death had been reported formally within the previous six months. That would have been
unusual. Mr Pollard said that, since his appointment in 1995, about 3000 deaths had been
reported to him each year out of a total of about 8000 deaths that occurred in his district.
24
SHIP02$$$8 09-04-03 20:56:16 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
So, if Shipman had signed 16 MCCDs and cremation certificates within three months and
had not reported any deaths to the Coroner, that fact would have been worthy of note.
The Coroner Informs the Police
2.7 Shortly after speaking to Dr Reynolds, Mr Pollard telephoned Chief Superintendent Sykes,
Commander of the Tameside Division of the GMP. The two men knew each other
personally and were on first name terms. Mr Pollard and CS Sykes disagree about how
much detail was given by Mr Pollard during their telephone conversation but it is clear that
they agreed to meet at Divisional Police Headquarters, Ashton-under-Lyne (‘Ashton’), a
short time later. It seems likely that Mr Pollard gave CS Sykes some indication of the nature
of the matter he wished to discuss, as CS Sykes asked Detective Inspector Smith to attend
the meeting.
2.8 CS Sykes says that Mr Pollard told him in some detail about the nature of the concerns
expressed. He wished to take advice from Detective Superintendent (Det Supt) Bernard
Postles, who was the senior divisional detective and acted as CS Sykes’ crime adviser.
However, he discovered that Det Supt Postles was on leave that day, so he decided to
instruct DI Smith, the senior sub-divisional detective, to attend the meeting, with a view to
him conducting the investigation that he understood would be required. CS Sykes said
that he chose DI Smith because he was the only detective officer of the rank of inspector
available to him. However, he regarded him as suitable for the work. He believed him to
be a very good operational detective. He regarded him as calm and level-headed. He
thought that DI Smith could undertake this investigation effectively. If he had not thought
so, he could and would have requested a suitably qualified officer from another part of
the Force.
The Meeting Between the Coroner and the Police
2.9 In evidence, Mr Pollard said that, when the three men met, he related to the police officers
all that Dr Reynolds had told him of her concerns. He told them that Dr Reynolds was
worried about the number of cremation certificates she and her partners had been asked
to sign for Shipman’s patients. He said that Dr Reynolds had signed a cremation certificate
for one of Shipman’s patients on the previous Thursday. He told the police the comparative
numbers of deaths and cremations for the two practices and he believes that he explained
the significance of the comparative numbers, although he doubts that he explained the
difference between a ‘death’ and a ‘cremation‘. He told the police that the Brooke Practice
had 9500 patients and said that Shipman was a sole practitioner but does not believe that
he discussed the possible size of Shipman’s practice. He thinks that he told the police that
Dr Reynolds’ partners shared her concerns. He said that he told the police that an
undertaker (who was not identified, at Dr Reynolds’ insistence) was also concerned about
deaths among Shipman’s patients, who were elderly females, were found in their day
clothes and were found dead by the doctor. Mr Pollard cannot now recall whether or not
he mentioned that Shipman was sometimes present at the death. He did not explain why
Dr Reynolds regarded these features as unusual or worrying. Indeed, I am not sure that
Mr Pollard himself understood why Dr Reynolds and the undertaker were worried about
25
SHIP02$$$8 09-04-03 20:56:16 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
these features. In view of these uncertainties in Mr Pollard’s mind, it is perhaps not
surprising that, at the end of the meeting, DI Smith did not have a completely clear idea
of the nature of Dr Reynolds’ concerns.
2.10 Mr Pollard said that he made plain to the police officers that any investigation should be
conducted with the utmost discretion and that, in particular, Shipman must not know
anything about it. The undertaker was not willing to disclose her name. He said that
Dr Reynolds was concerned that Shipman might be killing his patients but recognised that
it was possible that there was nothing amiss and that Shipman was a good and caring
doctor. Mr Pollard said that there was no discussion at this meeting about the possibility
of holding an autopsy on any body that was then available. Nor was any consideration
given to what might be done about arranging an autopsy in the event of another death
occurring that gave rise to any concern.
2.11 In evidence, DI Smith agreed that Mr Pollard told him about the number of cremation
certificates that the Brooke Practice doctors had signed for Shipman and the number for
the Brooke Practice itself but said that he had not understood the distinction between
deaths and cremations. He thought he was being asked to compare like with like and that
the figures given were the numbers of cremations within the last three months in each
practice. He did not know the size of Shipman’s patient list but he did realise that Shipman
was a sole practitioner and would have a much smaller list than the Brooke Practice. He
did not understand the significance of the common features noted by the undertaker. Like
Mr Pollard, he said that there was no discussion about the possibility of an autopsy. He
accepted that it was made plain to him that the concern was that Shipman might be killing
his patients, although it was said that he might just be a very caring doctor. DI Smith did
not recall that the Coroner told him that Dr Reynolds’ partners shared her concern. He said
that the Coroner suggested that he might begin his enquiries by obtaining the death
certificates of Shipman’s recently deceased patients. Mr Pollard did not think that he had
made any such suggestion. Wherever it came from, the suggestion was plainly a good
one.
2.12 CS Sykes had very little recollection of this meeting but what he recalled was broadly in
line with the recollections of Mr Pollard and DI Smith. He understood that Dr Reynolds had
two distinct concerns. One was that the death rate among Shipman’s patients appeared
to be far higher than that at the Brooke Practice. He did not appreciate that there was a
distinction between the number of deaths and the number of cremations. He, like DI Smith,
thought that the figures represented a comparison between like and like. However, he
knew that Shipman was a sole practitioner. He would have realised that, if Dr Reynolds
had even only one partner, it would suggest that Shipman’s death rate might be double
that of the Brooke Practice. CS Sykes said that he did not understand why some of the
features of the deaths gave rise to concern. He did not recall any discussion about the
bodies being fully dressed in day clothes. He realised that Dr Reynolds’ concern was that
Shipman might be killing his patients but he knew also that she had told the Coroner that
there might be another explanation for the high number of deaths. This was that Shipman,
being a very caring doctor, liked to keep his elderly patients at home rather than have them
die in hospital.
26
SHIP02$$$8 09-04-03 20:56:16 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
2.13 CS Sykes did not recall any discussion about the signing of Forms C. He frankly admitted
that, at that time, he knew nothing about death or cremation certification. He thought that
two doctors certified all deaths. He said that he understood that Dr Reynolds had recently
been involved in some way in helping to certify the death of one of Shipman’s patients and
that this would have raised the possibility that there might still be a body available for
autopsy. However, there was no discussion about the availability of a body or bodies. He
said that it would have been helpful if he had been told that the most recent patients to die
had not yet been cremated.
2.14 The only contemporaneous note of this important meeting is to be found in DI Smith’s
daybook, the hard-backed A4 book in which he made notes in connection with his work.
Mr Pollard, who was imparting the information, understandably did not take a further note,
but referred to the note he had made during his telephone conversation with Dr Reynolds.
CS Sykes did not make any record. A facsimile of the relevant pages of DI Smith’s
daybook, as they appeared at the end of the investigation, appears at Appendix A to this
Report. It can be seen that the information recorded in the middle and to the left of the
right-hand page (page 143) relates to what Mr Pollard says he told the police. There is
other information, mainly names and telephone numbers, on the right and towards the
bottom of the page. When asked to look at DI Smith’s daybook, Mr Pollard said that he had
not given DI Smith these names and telephone numbers. He had not mentioned
Mrs Janet Parkinson (then Consumer Liaison Manager for the WPHA), Gill (a receptionist
at the Brooke Practice), Mr Frederick Loader (the Superintendent Registrar at the
Tameside register office) or the personnel at the General Register Office (referred to in the
note as the ‘Registrar General Office’). He said he did not mention Dowse Catterall,
Jordan and Robinson, Armitages or Masseys, all of which are firms of funeral directors in
the Hyde area. Nor had he mentioned the names ‘Lily Higgins’ and ‘Ada Warburton’,
which appear on the right of the page. I am satisfied that only part of the information
recorded on that page was written at the meeting between the police and the Coroner on
24th March. Some of it was written later that day and the rest on the following day or days.
The Arrangements for the Investigation
2.15 Following the meeting with Mr Pollard, CS Sykes confirmed his instructions to DI Smith that
he was to investigate Dr Reynolds’ concerns. He also resolved to supervise DI Smith’s
work on this project himself. CS Sykes had been a uniformed officer for 30 years. As
Divisional Commander, he was responsible for determining the strategy for the division on
such topics as budget, resources and policy. He did not have extensive experience of
crime detection or criminal investigation. He said that if, in the course of his duties, he
needed advice on a criminal matter, he would turn to Det Supt Postles.
2.16 CS Sykes accepted that he shouldered overall responsibility for this investigation. He said
he was nominally responsible for all investigations in his division. However, he said the
number of ongoing criminal investigations and the nature of his other duties meant that he
could not usually take direct responsibility for supervision; that would be taken by a
Criminal Investigation Department (CID) officer. CS Sykes explained that his personal
duties would not allow time for him to read the files and keep up sufficiently with the detail
of what was happening. Sometimes, he would attend a briefing session in a criminal
27
SHIP02$$$8 09-04-03 20:56:16 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P002 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
investigation, but this was to keep himself generally informed, rather than to enable him to
undertake any active supervisory role. However, he decided not to instruct any other CID
officer to supervise DI Smith’s work on this investigation. Mr Pollard had spoken directly
to him and, having been present at the initial meeting with him, he knew more details about
the matter than he usually would. Whilst he retained overall responsibility for supervision,
CS Sykes did not give DI Smith any instructions or advice as to how he was to go about
the task of investigation. He did not see that as part of his function. He left him to his own
devices. He realised that DI Smith would have to undertake a ‘learning exercise’ but, if he
was in doubt or difficulty, there were many people to whom he could turn for advice. He
told DI Smith to keep him and the Coroner informed of progress.
2.17 Detective Chief Superintendent (DCS) Peter Stelfox explained to the Inquiry how a criminal
investigation should be supervised. He said that, in an investigation such as this one,
which was not of a routine nature, the supervising officer should give the officer
undertaking the investigation specific instructions as to whom s/he should interview and
what information should be sought. The supervising officer should ensure that the
investigating officer understands the purpose of what s/he is asked to do. At frequent
intervals, the supervising officer should find out what the investigating officer has
discovered. Usually, the investigating officer would submit a written report of what he had
done and found out, which the supervising officer would discuss with him.
2.18 It is most unfortunate that DI Smith did not have the advantage of an experienced detective
supervising his work. It is now clear that, although DI Smith was accustomed to working
as part of a team in major criminal investigations, his work had always been supervised
by a senior detective officer and he had never before been left to devise the way in which
an investigation should be carried out. Also, it is now clear that he did not fully understand
the nature and significance of Dr Reynolds’ concerns. He did not appreciate the
significance of the apparent disparity in the death rates within the two practices. Nor did
he understand why the common features mentioned by the undertaker gave rise to
concern. He told the Inquiry that he thought that what the Coroner had related was ‘a bit
wishy-washy’. This was, of course, a very different type of investigation from that which
DI Smith was accustomed to undertake. There was no definite reported ‘crime’. The task
was to investigate whether or not a crime or crimes might have been committed. A different
technique was required from that which he was accustomed to deploy.
2.19 DI Smith decided to undertake the investigation alone. He told the Inquiry that he thought
that, if he involved any other officer, there would be a danger that the nature of the
investigation might leak out. This, he said, had to be avoided because of the requirements
of strict confidentiality imposed by the Coroner and Dr Reynolds.
2.20 Accordingly, DI Smith embarked on this investigation with a poor understanding of the
issues and without the benefit of direct supervision by a more experienced senior
detective officer. Nor did he have the advantage of a colleague with whom to discuss the
conduct of the investigation.
28
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER THREE
The Investigation Under Way
The Evidence of Detective Inspector Smith
3.1 Detective Inspector Smith’s first action was to arrange a meeting with Dr Reynolds. It took
place in the afternoon of 24th March 1998. Before considering the evidence of what was
said at that meeting, or indeed during any of the later encounters that I shall consider, it
is necessary to say something of DI Smith’s reliability as a witness.
3.2 It is a matter of regret and an obvious focus of criticism that DI Smith made no proper notes
of his conversations with any of the people to whom he spoke in the course of the
investigation. He made some brief notes on three pages of his daybook; he also created
a chart or spreadsheet on his computer. He kept no diary note of his movements. Indeed,
it was extremely difficult for the Inquiry to work out a chronology of the investigation until
the records of the telephone used by DI Smith were obtained. At the end of the
investigation, DI Smith made no written report. I shall consider the effects of these failures
in greater detail later in this Report. At this stage, I draw attention to them to highlight the
evidential difficulties they have caused.
3.3 Although DI Smith made very few contemporaneous notes, he was later asked to provide
an account of what had occurred. In August 1998, Detective Superintendent Postles, who
had taken charge of the new police investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy,
discovered that DI Smith had not written a report on the first investigation. On instruction,
DI Smith wrote his first account, dated 17th August 1998. In November 1998, again at
Det Supt Postles’ request, DI Smith amplified some aspects of his earlier account. In April
2000, DI Smith was interviewed by Detective Superintendent (Det Supt) Peter Ellis, who
has since retired from the police force. Following Shipman’s convictions, Det Supt Ellis
had been instructed by Detective Chief Superintendent Alan Boardman (himself acting on
the direction of one of the assistant chief constables) to write a report on the first, failed
police investigation. Det Supt Ellis recorded DI Smith’s account and reproduced much of
it in his report. In August 2000, DI Smith provided a statement for the WPHA for use in
proposed disciplinary proceedings against Dr Banks, their Medical Adviser, who had
taken part in the investigation of March 1998. In November 2001, DI Smith provided a
written statement to the Inquiry. He subsequently provided two further statements to the
Inquiry, dealing mainly with his responses to the evidence of other witnesses.
3.4 The passage of time and the lack of any contemporaneous records of his investigation
caused genuine difficulties for DI Smith, when asked by Det Supt Postles, Det Supt Ellis
and the Inquiry to give an account of his actions and thinking. They were, of course,
difficulties of his own making in that, as an experienced police officer, he knew of his duty
to keep proper records and to write a report at the end of an investigation. By the time
DI Smith came to the Inquiry to give oral evidence, he had read or heard what a number
of other witnesses recalled of the first investigation. When he gave oral evidence, his
account was different in many respects from those he had given on earlier occasions. He
also sought to advance new explanations for his conduct and decisions. It appeared that
he had modified his version of events in the light of the documents and the accounts of
29
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
witnesses, which had become available as a result of the Inquiry’s investigation. He said
that the evidence of others had prompted recollections of matters he had previously
forgotten.
3.5 The first impression created by these changes of tack was extremely poor. It seemed that
this was a witness who would say almost anything in order to provide a convenient answer
to the point then being put to him. However, his counsel urged me to accept that DI Smith
was an honest witness, who had had grave difficulty in recalling the detail of events. He
had made a genuine effort to ‘work out’ what had really happened, in the light of the fresh
evidence with which he had been confronted.
3.6 In the end, my conclusions about DI Smith lie between these two extremes. It must be a
matter of regret and adverse comment that I cannot accept the oral evidence of an officer
of his rank as honest and accurate without having to undertake detailed consideration of
the various previous and sometimes inconsistent accounts he has given. As he was the
pivotal character in this investigation and, therefore, a most important witness, the
potential unreliability of his evidence has created considerable difficulties for me. In
respect of some incidents, I regard him as being reasonably reliable. However, on some
issues I have had to reject his evidence as untrue. I shall discuss later the extent to which
DI Smith did his best to recall events accurately and the extent to which he tried to
exculpate himself and the GMP from responsibility for the failure to detect signs of
Shipman’s unlawful actions during the first investigation.
Detective Inspector Smith’s First Meeting with Dr Reynolds
Before the Meeting
3.7 I return to DI Smith’s visit to Dr Reynolds. He telephoned the Brooke Practice at 12.51pm
on Tuesday, 24th March and made an appointment to see her at 3pm the same afternoon.
As can be seen, he noted in his daybook (see Appendix A) the name of the Brooke
Practice receptionist, Gill. As a small example of the many inconsistencies within
DI Smith’s evidence, he claimed in his Inquiry statement that he had been so concerned
about the need for confidentiality in the investigation that, when making this appointment,
he had not revealed to the receptionist that he was a police officer. Examination of the
Brooke Practice appointment sheet showed that he had. In oral evidence, he admitted that
this aspect of his statement was wrong.
3.8 Shortly before DI Smith’s arrival, Dr Reynolds received a telephone call from
Mrs Bambroffe, who asked why she had wanted to speak to Mr Massey on the previous
Sunday. Mrs Bambroffe says that, in the course of their conversation, Dr Reynolds told her
that she had spoken to her union (the MDU) about her concerns over Shipman.
Mrs Bambroffe also recalls Dr Reynolds telling her either that she was about to contact the
Coroner or that she had already done so. I find that Dr Reynolds told Mrs Bambroffe that
she had contacted the Coroner. I think it likely that Dr Reynolds also said that the concerns
were to be looked into by the police. Mrs Bambroffe says that she cannot remember that
being said but she agreed that she must have realised that, if the Coroner were involved,
the police might well be also.
30
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
Detective Inspector Smith’s Oral Evidence to the Inquiry about his First Meeting with
Dr Reynolds
3.9 The evidence of what was said at the meeting between Dr Reynolds and DI Smith came
almost entirely from him. Dr Reynolds never provided a detailed account of it. When asked
questions by his own counsel at the start of his evidence before the Inquiry on 27th May
2002, DI Smith said that he went through the information given to him by the Coroner and
that Dr Reynolds confirmed to him that it was correct. DI Smith said that Dr Reynolds then
told him that she thought that Shipman was killing his patients and that he was either doing
this through lack of care or by murdering them. She thought that, if he was murdering them,
he was doing it by giving them some sort of drug. He did not ask her what sort of drug this
might be and she did not volunteer any opinion. She also told him about her concerns that
many of the patients were found dead by Shipman himself. She said that there was an
undertaker (who did not wish to be named) who was also concerned about certain
common features of the deaths of Shipman’s patients. These were that the deaths were
mainly of elderly people, who were found wearing day clothes. DI Smith also said that the
figures that had been compiled ‘did not sit happily’ with Dr Reynolds. The fact that the
undertaker was also concerned had convinced her that she must come forward and make
a report.
3.10 DI Smith said that it did not appear to him that any one particular aspect of Dr Reynolds’
concerns was of greater importance than the others. He did not perceive, for example, that
she was especially concerned about the numbers of cremation certificates that members
of the Brooke Practice were signing for Shipman. He said that she did not say that her
partners shared her concerns. He did not ask her about this but said that he had the
impression that the partners were aware that she had decided to make a report, but that
they did not actively share her concerns or support her decision to act. He said that, at one
stage, Dr Reynolds said that she was not sure whether she was doing the right thing by
making the report.
3.11 DI Smith said that Dr Reynolds gave him some general background information about
Shipman. She said that he was an odd character who was not easy to get on with. He had
fallen out with the doctor who used to sign his cremation Forms C for him. That was why
he now used the Brooke Practice. That was quite inaccurate and cannot have been what
Dr Reynolds said; it is perhaps more likely that she mentioned his acrimonious departure
from the Donneybrook Practice. DI Smith said that that was all Dr Reynolds told him.
3.12 When questioned by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry, DI Smith said that he had not
understood the significance of the death rates that Dr Reynolds had reported to the
Coroner. He did not see the number of deaths as an important aspect of the investigation.
As far as he was concerned, Dr Reynolds suspected that Shipman was killing his patients
and that was what mattered. He did not understand the significance of any of the unusual
features of the deaths, about which Dr Reynolds and the unnamed undertaker were
concerned. He did not understand why Dr Reynolds was concerned that Shipman
appeared to have been present at a number of deaths or to have been the person who
first found the body. He said that he was wholly unfamiliar with the procedures for death
and cremation certification. He had not asked Dr Reynolds any specific questions, save
31
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
to confirm that the information he had been given by the Coroner was correct. He had also
asked her for some general information about Shipman, at which time she told him that
Shipman ran a scanner appeal. He was anxious to stress to the Inquiry that he had taken
Dr Reynolds’ concerns very seriously and that he regarded her as a responsible and
sensible person. His failure to make any record of his interview with her was not, he said,
a reflection of any lack of seriousness with which he was treating the investigation. He had
not, he said, regarded the concerns as being just too incredible to have any foundation
and he had not regarded Dr Reynolds as a woman with a ‘bee in her bonnet’.
Detective Inspector Smith’s August 1998 Account of his First Meeting with Dr Reynolds
3.13 DI Smith’s first written account of his conversation with Dr Reynolds, prepared in August
1998, five months after the event, was different in several respects from that given in oral
evidence.
3.14 DI Smith reported that the basis of Dr Reynolds’ concerns in March had been that, from
the time of her move to the Brooke Practice, there had been ‘general banter’ among her
partners about the fact that Shipman could always be relied on to supply extra ‘pocket
money’, by asking the doctors to countersign his cremation certificates. She had also
become concerned about certain features of the deaths of Shipman’s patients. These
were that the deceased appeared to be mostly female; they were discovered dead by
Shipman; they were wearing day clothes when found; most were later cremated. DI Smith
said that Dr Reynolds had mentioned that she had spoken to a local female undertaker
who had become aware of the circumstances of the deaths of Shipman’s patients. He
continued:
‘Indeed it became apparent that it was common gossip amongst
doctors, nurses and undertakers that Dr Shipman appeared to have
more elderly female deaths than other practices, although there was no
evidence to support this rumour.’
3.15 DI Smith finished by saying that the undertaker did not wish to be identified and that
Dr Reynolds herself did not wish her name to be made known during the investigation. She
had made the report for ‘peace of mind’ after consultation with her partners.
3.16 It will be noted that DI Smith referred to the high death rate among Shipman’s patients as
amounting to no more than a rumour. He did not mention the comparative figures supplied
by Dr Reynolds. Nor was there any reference to the serious nature of Dr Reynolds’
concerns, in that she suspected that Shipman might be killing his patients and doing so
by giving them some sort of drug. It is hard to resist the inference that, in August 1998,
DI Smith was ‘playing down’ the seriousness of the concerns he had been asked to
investigate and was seeking to attribute Dr Reynolds’ report to gossip, banter and rumour.
By August 1998, the police had real grounds to suspect that Shipman had killed
Mrs Kathleen Grundy. They knew that morphine had been found in her body. They had
also learned of his previous convictions. Suspicions about other deaths were beginning
to emerge and the police had decided to look at those deaths of which they were aware
in March 1998. DI Smith must have been aware of the possibility that he had missed
32
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
something important earlier in the year. It appears to me that, in August 1998, he was
seeking to deflect possible criticism.
Detective Inspector Smith’s Account of his First Meeting with Dr Reynolds as Given to
Detective Superintendent Ellis in April 2000
3.17 DI Smith’s account of his meeting with Dr Reynolds, as recorded by Det Supt Ellis in April
2000, was also different in material respects from his evidence to the Inquiry. However, he
did tell Det Supt Ellis that Dr Reynolds had given the Coroner the number of patients on
the Brooke Practice list (9500) and had said that the practice had had 14 deaths in three
months, whereas there had been 16 deaths in Shipman’s practice. I think it unlikely that
DI Smith volunteered this information and believe that it was probably given in answer to
Det Supt Ellis’ questions about the numbers written in DI Smith’s daybook.
3.18 DI Smith’s description of his conversation with Dr Reynolds did not reflectthe serious nature
of her concerns. He said that Dr Reynolds seemed uncertain about whether she had been
right to make a report. She had told himthat, since she had joined the Brooke Practice,there
had been‘banter’amongstthe partners about Shipman providingpocketmoney.Although
Dr Reynolds said that she had consulted her partners before making her report to the
Coroner, DI Smith had formed the opinion that she was acting alone and did not have their
support. The partners were still countersigning cremation certificates for Shipman. The
implication was that, if they were still doing that,they could not share her concerns. DI Smith
told Det Supt Ellis that Dr Reynolds had outlined her concerns, as relayed by the Coroner,
and had highlighted a number of ‘alleged features’ of the deaths that gave rise to concern.
These were that the persons appeared to be mainly female; they were discovered dead by
Shipman; they were wearing day clothes when found; the majority appeared to have been
cremated. Dr Reynolds had been prompted to make her report after a discussion with an
undertaker, ‘THE IDENTITY OF WHOMSHE REFUSED TO DIVULGE’ (written thus by
Det Supt Ellis, as if to suggest that it were of some importance).
3.19 DI Smith told Det Supt Ellis that he had spoken to Dr Reynolds for about 45 minutes. At no
time had she suggested that she and her partners had done any calculations or
suggested that Shipman’s patients were three times more likely to die than patients of the
Brooke Practice. Nor had she said that she suspected that Shipman was killing his
patients. She had not provided any ‘figures or other documentary evidence’.
3.20 I make two observations about this account. First, it plainly diminished the seriousness
and credibility of Dr Reynolds’ concerns. Her concerns were presented as vague and
unfocussed. It made her sound like a woman who was ‘out on a limb’, expressing concerns
which her partners did not share and which even she was unsure whether or not to voice.
It made her appear reluctant to co-operate with the police by providing the name of an
important witness. Her failure to provide ‘figures or other documentary evidence’
appeared to indicate either lack of co-operation on her part or the absence of available
evidence. Second, this account was inconsistent in important respects with DI Smith’s
evidence on oath to the Inquiry. Most significantly, to Det Supt Ellis he asserted that
Dr Reynolds had not said that she suspected Shipman of killing his patients whereas, in
evidence, he admitted that she had said this at an early stage of their meeting.
33
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
Detective Inspector Smith’s Account of this Meeting in his Inquiry Statement
3.21 DI Smith’s account of his first meeting with Dr Reynolds, put forward in his Inquiry
statement of November 2001, did not correct the misleading impression he had given to
Det Supt Ellis. He again spoke of Dr Reynolds’ refusal to reveal the name of the female
undertaker who was said to share her concerns. He did not say that, in refusing,
Dr Reynolds was obeying a restriction placed on her by the undertaker herself. He said
that Dr Reynolds’ conversation with the undertaker had ‘supported gossip and banter
which she had become aware of during her 18 months with the Practice’. DI Smith
said that Dr Reynolds had said that it was a standing joke among the partners that, if a
general practitioner were ‘on cover’, Shipman would be likely to come in asking for a
cremation form to be signed, for which the doctor would receive about £30 as ‘Ash Cash’.
She had told him what little she knew about Shipman, which included the fact that he ran
a ‘Scanner appeal’. He claimed that Dr Reynolds had said nothing of which it was worth
making a note and nothing of any evidential value. He repeated that he did not believe that
she had the support of her partners. She had not told him of the existence of a cremation
book kept by the Brooke Practice and no such book was produced to him. In short, even
as late as November 2001, DI Smith’s account sought to diminish the seriousness and
credibility of Dr Reynolds’ concerns and to blame her, implicitly, for not volunteering useful
evidence, whether oral or documentary.
The Effect of these Inconsistent Accounts
3.22 It will now be apparent that the account DI Smith gave in oral evidence amounted to a
significant change of stance. He no longer sought to diminish Dr Reynolds’ concerns. He
no longer attributed them to gossip or banter. In the light of the evidence already heard
by the Inquiry from Mr Reynolds, Dr Gough, the Coroner and the doctors from the Brooke
Practice, such a stance would have been untenable. DI Smith at last admitted frankly that
Dr Reynolds had told him that she suspected Shipman of killing his patients. In effect,
DI Smith was driven to admit that all his earlier accounts had been inaccurate and
misleading.
3.23 My general conclusion about this part of DI Smith’s evidence is that his oral evidence is
much closer to the truth than any of his previous statements. The differences are so great
that I do not think that he can have had an honest belief in the accuracy of his earlier
accounts at the time they were given. I regret to say that I have come to the conclusion
that he gave these misleading accounts in the hope of avoiding any criticism in respect of
his conduct of the first investigation. He did this by putting the blame on Dr Reynolds for
failing to provide evidence and by giving the impression that her concerns were based on
rumour and banter.
The Deaths of Mrs Lily Higgins and Miss Ada Warburton
3.24 There is, however, at least one important respect in which it appears that even the oral
evidence of DI Smith might be wrong. This relates to his denial that, on 24th March 1998,
Dr Reynolds had told him that there were two bodies then lying at funeral directors’
premises, on which it might be possible to arrange autopsies. This suggestion was put to
34
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
him by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry. In support, she drew attention to the right of the
right-hand page of DI Smith’s daybook (see page 143), where there appears a list of four
firms of funeral directors. Under the first name, ‘Dowse Catterall’, is written the name ‘Lily
Higgins’ and the word ‘stroke’. Mrs Higgins had died the previous week. The MCCD,
signed by Shipman, attributed the death to a cerebrovascular accident (colloquially
known as a stroke). Dr Reynolds had signed the cremation Form C and, according to
Dr Gough’s note, made the previous day, believed that the funeral was to take place on
Thursday, 26th March. In fact, it was to be held on Wednesday, 25th March. The point is
that, at the time when Dr Reynolds spoke to DI Smith, she believed, correctly, that
Mrs Higgins’ body had not yet been cremated and was lying at the premises of Dowse
Catterall. The second firm of funeral directors listed was ‘Jordan and Robinson’.
Underneath their name appears the name ‘Ada Warburton’ and, underneath that, the
word ‘stroke’. Miss Warburton had died on 20th March. Shipman had certified that her
death was due to a cerebrovascular accident. Dr Dirckze had signed her cremation Form
C on 23rd March. On 24th March, Miss Warburton’s body was lying at the premises of
Robinson and Jordan. The third firm of funeral directors listed on the right-hand side of the
page was ‘Armitages’; the fourth was ‘Masseys’. There is no note of the name of a
deceased person below the names of these last two firms of funeral directors. Examination
of the Brooke Practice records shows that the last four cremation Forms C which
Dr Reynolds had signed prior to 24th March 1998 related to Mrs Lily Higgins,
Mr Harold Eddleston, Mrs Laura Linn and Mrs Alice Black. The funeral directors listed in
DI Smith’s notebook were the four firms involved in those four deaths.
3.25 Leading Counsel to the Inquiry suggested to DI Smith that Dr Reynolds had given him the
information he recorded in his daybook during their conversation on 24th March. He
denied that that was so. Counsel also suggested that Dr Reynolds had given him the
information he recorded in the context of a discussion about bodies that were available
for autopsy.
3.26 In rejecting Counsel’s suggestions, DI Smith claimed that he had noted down the names
of the four funeral directors and the two recently deceased patients, Mrs Higgins and
Miss Warburton, when he visited the crematorium on a later occasion. He claimed that he
had noted the names of Mrs Higgins and Miss Warburton because he had been minded
to visit the funeral directors to enquire about those two deaths. However, he had not done
so. It can be seen that, at some stage, DI Smith wrote the names and telephone numbers
of all four funeral directors on the left-hand page of his daybook (see page 142), opposite
the page on which he made the notes of his meeting with the Coroner. It is not clear when
those names and telephone numbers were written. It is possible that DI Smith obtained the
numbers from the Brooke Practice receptionist, as he left his meeting with Dr Reynolds;
he could have found them in a telephone book; it is possible that he was given them at the
crematorium. It will be seen that, on the right-hand page where the names of the funeral
directors appear in the lower right corner, the name of Miss Warburton’s funeral director
is written as ‘Jordan and Robinson’. In fact the name is Robinson and Jordan. The error
appears to have originated in the Brooke Practice record of Forms C, where the funeral
director for Miss Warburton is written as ‘Jordan and Robinson’. The error recurs on the
left-hand page of DI Smith’s daybook. However, as will later appear, in the list of funeral
35
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
directors made at the crematorium, DI Smith has written the name correctly, as ‘Robinson
and Jordan’. That would seem to suggest that DI Smith did not write the list of names and
telephone numbers at the crematorium. Further, the correlation of the names of the four
firms that DI Smith recorded on the right-hand page of the daybook with the firms involved
in the last four deaths for which Dr Reynolds signed Forms C strongly suggests that
Dr Reynolds provided the names of the four firms.
3.27 On the basis of the notes written on the right-hand page, it seems to me likely that
Dr Reynolds did tell DI Smith about the presence of two bodies lying at funeral directors’
premises. However, there is some further evidence suggesting that she did, and that she
did so in the context of a discussion about possible autopsies. First, the name
‘Ada Warburton’ appears on the small handwritten note made by Dr Reynolds to which
I referred earlier and which Dr Reynolds had probably used to refresh her memory when
speaking to Mr Pollard. I think Dr Reynolds had that note with her when she saw DI Smith.
She wrote his telephone and pager numbers on the back. If she had the note with her, it
is likely that she would have mentioned to DI Smith the information recorded in it. Second,
on 30th March 1998, Dr Reynolds telephoned Dr Gough of the MDU to give a progress
report. Dr Gough’s contemporaneous note records that Dr Reynolds told her that she had
reported her concerns to the Coroner, who had taken them seriously. She had also seen
a senior CID officer (which must be a reference to DI Smith) and it was intended that there
would be an autopsy of the body of the deceased person who had been identified by
Dr Reynolds. This examination would probably be conducted by a Home Office
pathologist. I accept that Dr Reynolds must have said something like that to Dr Gough.
Dr Reynolds must have got her impression from somewhere. It can only have been from
either the Coroner or DI Smith. In view of the note in his daybook, it is far more likely that
it was the latter. Third, there is also evidence from Dr Patel that he recalled Dr Reynolds
telling him that she had told the police about the availability of two bodies at the premises
of funeral directors. Dr Booth also thought that Dr Reynolds had told the police about the
availability of a body for autopsy.
3.28 My conclusion on this issue is that Dr Reynolds did tell DI Smith that the bodies of
Mrs Higgins and Miss Warburton had not yet been cremated and that DI Smith must have
said something from which Dr Reynolds understood that there would be an autopsy. This
conclusion is supported by further evidence that I shall consider in Chapter Eleven.
The Shortcomings of Detective Inspector Smith’s First Interview with Dr Reynolds
3.29 There were many things that DI Smith did not find out from Dr Reynolds during this first
conversation. He said that, by the end of the interview, he still did not recognise the
importance of the comparative death rates. Dr Patel and Dr Dirckze said that they were
sure that Dr Reynolds would have wished to impress on DI Smith the importance of the
disparity in death rates. Dr Patel said that the figures were ‘the most significant factor’ and
Dr Dirckze said that they were the ‘fundamental reason’ for making the report to the
Coroner. Mr Reynolds said that the statistics were his wife’s ‘greatest concern’. I think it
highly likely that Dr Reynolds did stress the importance of the figures but it is clear that
DI Smith either did not understand the figures or did not appreciate the significance of
them. He did not ask Dr Reynolds to explain why she was worried about the number of
36
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
deaths. He did not ask where the figures had come from or ask to see the records from
which they had been derived.
3.30 DI Smith did not understand why Dr Reynolds and the undertaker were concerned about
the ‘unusual features’ of the deaths of Shipman’s patients or even why they were
concerned that Shipman was often present at or just after the death. Yet he did not ask
Dr Reynolds to explain this to him. Nor did he ask her about the circumstances of the
individual cases in which she had recently signed a Form C. He did not ask to interview
any of the other Brooke Practice doctors. He could have done so, without breaching the
constraints of confidentiality under which he was operating. Had he done so, they would
have been willing to assist and could have told him of their own concerns and of the deaths
for which they had recently signed Forms C.
3.31 DI Smith did not understand the system of death certification and the different system of
cremation certification. He did not know what was involved in the completion of an MCCD
or cremation Forms B and C or what information they contained when completed. He did
not know to what extent, if any, the Form C doctor had independent evidence upon which
to make his/her own judgement about the cause of death. He did not know where the
completed Forms B and C were stored after the cremation had taken place nor from where
he might be able to obtain them. He did not know of the existence or role of the medical
referee at the crematorium.
3.32 DI Smith did not discuss with Dr Reynolds what she or her partners should do if they
received another request to sign a Form C for Shipman. However, it appears that he did
give Dr Reynolds his telephone and pager numbers. I infer that he invited her to contact
him if she wished to do so.
3.33 It is not a matter of criticism that DI Smith did not know about the systems of death and
cremation certification or that he did not immediately understand, for example, why it
should be a cause for concern that a number of dead bodies were found in day clothes.
He could not be expected to know all these things. My criticism is that he did not ask, either
then or at any time during the investigation. I am quite sure that, had he asked any
questions of Dr Reynolds or her partners, they would have been pleased to give a full
explanation. They would have provided access to their records to demonstrate the origin
of the comparative figures. I do not criticise DI Smith for not asking all these questions on
this first occasion. It might not have been convenient, either for him or for Dr Reynolds, to
spend the time together necessary for him to gain a proper understanding of her
concerns. DI Smith said that he regarded this meeting as an opportunity to obtain basic
information. However, he never went back to Dr Reynolds for an in-depth discussion of the
issues and the procedures underlying them.
3.34 Although DI Smith told Det Supt Ellis that his interview with Dr Reynolds lasted about 45
minutes, I am quite satisfied that it lasted no more than 20 minutes. This can be calculated
by reference to the time of a telephone call made by DI Smith at 3.43pm, following his
return to Ashton police station. His interview with Dr Reynolds began soon after 3pm.
When it was over, he drove to Dukinfield, a journey of about five to six minutes. He went to
the Tameside register office and talked to the Superintendent Registrar, Mr Loader. They
spoke for about ten minutes. From there, DI Smith drove to Ashton police station, which
37
SHIP02$$$9 14-04-03 10:10:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P003 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
he said took about five to six minutes. I infer that he must have left Dr Reynolds’ surgery
soon after 3.20pm. When giving evidence to the Inquiry, Det Supt Postles (who had, by
then, been promoted to the rank of Detective Chief Superintendent and whom I shall, to
avoid confusion, in future call Mr Postles) said that an interview of about an hour and a half
would have been necessary if all the important issues were to be covered. I conclude that
DI Smith’s interview with Dr Reynolds was brief and inadequate.
3.35 DI Smith’s interview with Dr Reynolds was crucial to the success of his investigation. It was
his opportunity to ensure that he fully understood the nature of her concerns and to assess
their strength. DI Smith told the Inquiry that, at the end of it, he did not really know ‘where
to go’, by which he meant that he did not know how to go about investigating Dr Reynolds’
concerns. Yet, when he reported back to CS Sykes, he did not say that he was in any
difficulty. Nor did he seek the advice of any other detective officer.
3.36 Chief Superintendent Sykes recalled that DI Smith told him that he had seen Dr Reynolds.
This conversation must have taken place either during the late afternoon of 24th March or
on the morning of 25th March. DI Smith said that he had discovered that Shipman ran a
scanner appeal to which some of the deceased might have made legacies. CS Sykes said
that DI Smith did not give him the impression that he did not believe Dr Reynolds or was
not taking her concerns seriously.
3.37 Mr Reynolds recalls that, when his wife told him that she had seen a police officer who was
to investigate her concerns, she seemed very relieved, as she felt she had laid down the
burden of responsibility for deciding what should be done. She felt that her concerns were
being taken seriously. It appears to me that DI Smith gave the impression that he fully
understood the nature and importance of Dr Reynolds’ concerns and assured her that
they would be looked into. But, in truth, he was setting out on a difficult voyage without a
map, compass or guide.
The Possibility of Arranging an Autopsy
3.38 It is clear that DI Smith did not take any steps to arrange an autopsy on the body of any of
Shipman’s former patients. He said that he was not aware of the availability of any bodies
but, even if he had been, he would not have known whether the Coroner would be able or
willing to order an autopsy unless there were grounds for suspicion in the individual case.
He did not attempt at any stage to discuss the issue either with the Coroner or even,
according to CS Sykes, with him. Given the Coroner’s interest in the investigation, the
appropriate course would have been to discuss the matter with him. Mr Pollard said that,
if told that there was a body available, he would, if asked, have been prepared to order an
autopsy (probably to be conducted by a pathologist approved by the Home Office) and,
at that time, would have been prepared to do so without giving reasons for his decision.
As I have already said, he pointed out that, if he had ordered an autopsy, Shipman might
well have realised who had reported the death to the Coroner and Dr Reynolds might not
have been able to maintain her anonymity.
38
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER FOUR
The Register Office
The Request for Copy Death Certificates
4.1 On leaving Dr Reynolds’ surgery, Detective Inspector Smith drove to the Tameside
register office at Dukinfield Town Hall. There, he saw Mr Loader, the Superintendent
Registrar, and asked to be provided with copies of all entries in the registers of deaths
relating to deaths certified by Shipman during the previous six months. DI Smith had
decided to investigate the deaths over a period of six months, although the figures
provided by the Brooke Practice covered only the previous three months. That was not an
unreasonable decision although, in the event, it proved unfortunate, as it gave rise to
considerable confusion.
4.2 DI Smith would have been entitled as of right (on payment of a fee) to obtain a certified
copy of the entry in the register of deaths in relation to any identified deceased person.
However, DI Smith did not know the names of the deceased persons in whom he was
interested. He wanted the register office staff to search the registers to find all the deaths
certified by Shipman. He wanted photocopies to be provided, preferably free of charge.
Before Mr Loader could comply with his request, authority had to be obtained from the
General Register Office (GRO) at Southport. Mr Loader advised DI Smith to contact the
GRO direct, to obtain the necessary authority. He provided the telephone number and
DI Smith wrote it in his daybook.
4.3 DI Smith then returned to the police station at Ashton and made two telephone calls to the
GRO. As I have already said, the first of these was timed at 3.43pm. DI Smith had some
difficulty in locating the right person at the GRO but it appears that, in due course, he was
advised that photocopies of the relevant entries would be provided, free of charge, if a
formal written request were received from a senior police officer.
4.4 DI Smith recalls that he typed an appropriate letter and had it signed by a senior officer.
Both Chief Superintendent Sykes and Mr Postles claim that they signed it. DI Smith says
he sent it to the GRO. No trace of that letter can be found either at the GRO or at Ashton
police station. However, there is no reason to believe that it was not sent. It is not clear
whether the letter was written in the late afternoon of 24th March and sent by post or was
sent by fax during the late morning of the following day.
4.5 During the morning of 25th March, there were several telephone calls between the
Tameside register office and the GRO in Southport and between DI Smith, the Tameside
register office and the GRO. By about lunchtime, it appears that authority had been given
for Mr Loader to provide the copy entries to DI Smith. Together with those of his staff who
were available for the task, Mr Loader made a search of all the registers of deaths covering
the last six months. Mr Loader said that all relevant entries were photocopied and were
handed to DI Smith.
4.6 Each of these documents was a photocopy of the relevant entry in the register of deaths.
Certified copies of the entry are provided to a deceased’s family at the time of registration
39
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
and are commonly known as ‘death certificates’; DI Smith used the same term to describe
the photocopies he obtained. I shall therefore refer to them as ‘copy death certificates’.
The Issue
4.7 Within the previous six months, Shipman had, in fact, certified the cause of death of 31 of
his patients. DI Smith said that, on the morning of Thursday, 26th March, he received a
bundle of copy death certificates from Mr Loader at the register office. Unfortunately,
neither he nor Mr Loader made any record of how many were handed over. Before the
Inquiry, an issue arose as to how many copy death certificates Mr Loader gave to DI Smith.
4.8 Mr Loader and his staff maintain that, as there were 31 relevant entries, he must have
provided 31 copy death certificates. DI Smith has always claimed that he was not given
31 certificates. Until shortly before the Inquiry hearing, he contended that he had been
given particulars of 19 deaths. Recently, he claimed that he was given 20 certificates but,
for the moment, that slight difference does not matter. The issue is whether he was given
31 certificates or significantly fewer.
4.9 The question of how many copy death certificates Mr Loader handed over to DI Smith
occupied a good deal of the Inquiry’s time. The issue was of some importance to those
concerned. The register office staff felt strongly that they had been wrongly accused of
incompetence in failing to provide a complete set of certificates. They pride themselves
on the accuracy and care with which they perform their duties.
4.10 DI Smith contended that his investigation was blighted from an early stage because he
was misled by the register office into thinking that only 19 or 20 of Shipman’s patients had
died during the previous six months. If that were so, it would mean that Dr Reynolds’ claim
that 16 of Shipman’s patients had been cremated in three months was probably wrong
and that the death rate among Shipman’s patients might not have been worryingly high.
DI Smith might properly claim that he had been lulled into a false sense of security by the
register office’s mistake.
4.11 I have already indicated that, when DI Smith left Dr Reynolds’ surgery on 24th March, he
did not regard the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients as a particularly important
aspect of the investigation. He thought that Shipman had had 16 patient deaths in three
months. That being so, it may be thought that, even if DI Smith had received 31 – rather
than 19 or 20 – certificates in respect of the six-month period, he would probably not have
appreciated that this figure gave rise to any cause for concern.
4.12 In the event, I have decided that, so far as possible, I must resolve the issue of how many
certificates were provided. Apart from the position of DI Smith and the registrars, the
number of deaths among Shipman’s patients also came to the attention of Dr Banks,
Medical Adviser to the WPHA. If he had been aware of the true number, it is possible that
his level of concern might have been raised.
The Rival Contentions:DI Smith
4.13 DI Smith advanced the following contentions. First, he said that, after he received the copy
death certificates, he returned to Ashton police station, sorted them into chronological
40
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
order and made a list or chart of all the names. Later, the chart was transferred to the
computer. The manuscript chart has not survived but the computer spreadsheet is
available and contains 19 names. In August 1998, the spreadsheet was adapted for use
in the later police investigation and four versions of it were made available to the Inquiry.
However, I am satisfied that the only version which represents DI Smith’s workduring the
first investigation is that reproduced at Appendix B of this Report. DI Smith initially claimed
that, as his spreadsheet contained only 19 names, he must have received only 19 copy
death certificates. Certainly, it is hard to see why, if he had received 31 certificates, he only
ever entered 19 onto his spreadsheet. However, the position is not as straightforward as
that analysis would suggest. Later on the afternoon of 26th March, DI Smith visited the
premises of the WPHA and provided Mrs Parkinson with a list of 17 names. He has
advanced explanations for why he did not give her all the names he had. The position is
further complicated by the fact that DI Smith has, at times, suggested that he received the
19 certificates in two batches on two separate occasions and yet, ever since shortly before
he gave oral evidence to the Inquiry, he has claimed that he received 20 certificates, all
at the same time. These changes do nothing to enhance his standing as a reliable witness.
I shall have to return to those issues later but I am impressed by the evidence that only
19 names were entered on DI Smith’s spreadsheet and therefore, by inference, on the
manuscript chart which he prepared soon after collecting the copy death certificates from
the register office.
4.14 DI Smith’s second contention was that it had been shown that members of the register
office staff were capable of making errors when asked to search the registers of deaths.
In August 1998, when the second police investigation was under way, the police asked
the staff to search the registers for deaths certified by Shipman since the death of
Mrs Lily Higgins. One entry (that relating to Mr Vernon Nield) was missed by the staff.
Incorrect information was given in respect of another entry from February 1998 (that of
Mrs Irene Berry). Because of concerns that there may have been more deaths among
Shipman’s patients within the six-month period than DI Smith had recorded on his
spreadsheet, the police then sent in a team to search the registers for deaths which had
occurred over the past year. The entry relating to Mrs Irene Chapman was not found but
it was not clear whether this happened because the police were not given the relevant
register or whether they were given the register and missed the entry themselves.
4.15 The point was also made that the register office had previously admitted that they had not
provided a full set of certificates in March 1998. They could not now be heard to claim that
they had in fact done so. The evidence showed that, at the time of the August 1998
searches, Mrs Brenda Clayton, Additional Superintendent and Mr Loader’s deputy,
appeared to have accepted that the register office had failed to supply a full set of copy
death certificates in the March. She suggested that the shortfall must have been due to
human error within the register office. I am satisfied that that admission was made.
However, at that time, the attention of the police and register office staff was focussed on
their current enquiries and I do not thinkit would be right to attach much weight to
Mrs Clayton’s admission. Also, it appears that Mrs Clayton may have believed that the
register office had provided a list of entries rather than a bundle of copy certificates and
so accepted, without further thought, that the mistake must have been that of the register
41
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
office staff. What was surprising, in view of the seriousness with which the register office
staff treat the present suggestion that they made mistakes, is the low level of concern
apparently felt by the staff in August 1998, when it was suggested to Mrs Clayton that they
had missed a number of entries the previous March.
The Rival Contentions:the Register Office Staff
4.16 The register office staff contended first that it was unthinkable that they could make so
many mistakes as to miss 11 or 12 out of 31 relevant entries. They said that care and
accuracy are fundamental requirements of their work. They might accept that, being
human, one of them might have made the odd mistake. However, if as many as 12 entries
were missed, they were missed from three different registers, which would suggest that
more than one member of staff must have been at fault. That, they claimed, would be
inconceivable.
4.17 Second, the register office staff suggested that DI Smith could have lost 11 or 12 of the
certificates. It is common ground that they were handed to him in an envelope. It is not
fanciful to suggest that DI Smith might have lost some of them. He explained that, although
he was supposed to have an office to himself at Ashton police station, in practice, many
other people used it and there were often piles of exhibits lying on the deskor even on the
floor. On occasions, he would go to another office and workwherever there was an empty
desk. From this description, it does seem to me possible that he could have mislaid some
of the copy death certificates. However, I do not thinkthat he had 31 certificates with him
when he visited the premises of the WPHA in the afternoon of 26th March. If he lost any
certificates, he had lost them by then. I thinkit is highly unlikely that he would have mislaid
any certificates so quickly. I also think it unlikely that he would have lost them altogether.
Had some been mislaid, I thinkit likely that they would have turned up later. If that had
occurred, I thinkthat DI Smith would have added the extra names to his chart.
4.18 The third argument advanced by the staff of the register office was that, if DI Smith had
received only 19 or 20 certificates, he would immediately have recognised that this
number was inconsistent with the information given to him by Dr Reynolds. She had told
him that the Brooke Practice doctors had signed 16 cremation forms for Shipman in the
previous three months. One would therefore expect that there had been about 32 deaths
in the six-month period. In fact, one might have expected there to be more, because the
deaths known to the Brooke Practice doctors would not have included any patients who
had been buried or any patients whose Forms C had been signed by a doctor other than
one from the Brooke Practice or any that had been certified by the coroner. On the other
hand, one might have expected that the death rate would be higher during the winter
months of January, February and March than in the previous three months. In any event,
submitted Mr Geoffrey Tattersall QC, on behalf of the register office staff, the provision of
only 19 or 20 certificates would have struckDI Smith as obviously wrong and he would
have realised immediately that he had not been given as many as he had been expecting.
Moreover, when he examined the dates of death, he would have realised that there were
not 16 cremations (or deaths) in any three-month period. In short, if he had received only
19 or 20 certificates, it would have been so obvious that his bundle was incomplete that
he would have either contacted the register office to see whether there should have been
42
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
more certificates or returned to Dr Reynolds to query the accuracy of her figures.
Mr Tattersall submitted that the fact that DI Smith did neither of these things showed that
he must, in fact, have received 31 certificates.
4.19 This last argument is attractive and would have much persuasive force if I thought that
DI Smith had understood the significance of the numbers of cremations and deaths he
had been given by Dr Reynolds or that he had formed any view as to the number of
certificates he might expect to receive for the six-month period. But I am afraid that he did
not. He does not seem to have been struckby the disparity in the figures even when he
wrote them down. I cannot draw the inference that he must have received a full set of
certificates merely because he did not realise that 19 or 20 deaths in six months was
inconsistent with Dr Reynolds’ figures.
The Search of the Registers
4.20 The arguments that I have just considered leave me quite undecided as to where the truth
lies. The most persuasive factor is that DI Smith entered only 19 names onto his
spreadsheet and gave significantly fewer than 31 names to Mrs Parkinson, when he
visited the WPHA on the afternoon of 26th March. However, I must consider in detail the
evidence about the way in which the search was conducted by the register office staff, to
see whether it throws any light on the likelihood of a mistake or mistakes having been
made.
4.21 In order to explain what happened at the register office, it is necessary to describe the
system of entering and keeping records in the registers of deaths. In 1998, there were four
registrars at the Tameside register office, each of whom had a separate register of deaths.
The four registrars were Mrs Carol McCann, Miss Marilyn Partoon, Mrs Dorothy Craven
and Mrs Caroline Dewhurst. The registers are lettered A, B, C and D. Each register has a
number, as well as its initial, and contains the particulars of 300 deaths. There are two
entries on each page, set out side by side. When the bookis open, four entries are visible
at the same time. Each entry contains particulars about the deceased person, the person
reporting the death (the ‘informant’), the causes of death and the identity of the person
(i.e. the doctor or coroner) who has certified the cause of death. In 1998, each registrar’s
current register was kept in her own office. When a registrar was absent for any reason
(and some staff worked part-time), a deputy registrar might use her office and carry out
registrations using the absent registrar’s current register. When a register was full, it was
retained in the registrar’s office for a few weeks, then transferred to a secure storeroom.
4.22 Mr Loader accepted that he organised the search of the registers for entries relating to the
deaths certified by Shipman, although his memory of the event is patchy. I am
satisfied that the search tookplace during the afternoon of Wednesday, 25th March.
Mrs Margaret Burns (who did administrative workin the main office but who also worked
as a deputy registrar when one of the registrars was absent) appeared to have a good
recollection of the search. She said that it tookplace that afternoon. Mrs Sandra Brown
(also an administrative worker and part-time deputy registrar) left the office at about
1.15pm that day; she is sure that she did not take part in the search and no one else recalls
her doing so. I am satisfied that the search started shortly after 1.30pm. It seems likely that
43
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
it was completed before 3.27pm, at which time Mr Loader telephoned Mr David Trembath
at the GRO. Mr Trembath was the manager whose authority was required before the
photocopies could be provided.
4.23 Eight registers had to be searched, i.e. four current registers and each registrar’s
immediate past (‘deposited’) register. Errors could have occurred either when the
registers were searched or during the photocopying process. If, as DI Smith has for the
most part contended, he was given only 19 copy certificates, this would mean that 12
entries were missed during the search or not copied as they should have been. If he was
given 20, 11 were missed or not copied. It is also possible that some copies were mislaid
after they had been prepared but before DI Smith collected them.
4.24 Comparison between the spreadsheet on DI Smith’s computer and the full list of deaths
certified by Shipman during the six-month period permitted the identification of those
entries that had or might have been missed, not copied or lost. The result was as follows:
Register A52 (Mrs McCann’s deposited register)
All relevant entries were found.
Register A53 (Mrs McCann’s current register)
Some relevant entries were found in this register but either three or four entries
were missed, not copied or lost. If three were missed, they were the entries for
Mrs Alice Black, Mrs Irene Chapman and Mrs Martha Marley (whose death had occurred
on 24th March and had been registered by Mrs McCann on the morning of 25th March).
If four were missed (i.e. if DI Smith received only 19 certificates, rather than 20) the
entry for Miss Ada Warburton was also missed, not copied or lost. Her death had been
registered by Mrs McCann on 24th March.
Register B50 (Miss Partoon’s deposited register)
Three relevant entries were found but two were missed, not copied or lost.
Register B51 (Miss Partoon’s current register)
All four relevant entries were found.
Register C46 (Mrs Craven’s deposited register)
There was no relevant entry in this register.
Register C47 (Mrs Craven’s current register)
Four relevant entries were found but six were missed, not copied or lost.
Registers D49 and D50 (Mrs Dewhurst’s deposited and current registers)
All relevant entries were found in both registers.
4.25 The evidence to the Inquiry focussed mainly on who had been responsible for searching
A53 (Mrs McCann’s current register), B50 (Miss Partoon’s deposited register) and C47
(Mrs Craven’s current register). I also regarded the evidence about the photocopying
process as significant.
44
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
How Long Did the Search Take?
4.26 Mr Loader said that the search was not difficult but it was very time-consuming and
presented something of a problem, as he was short of staff at the material time.
Mrs Craven was absent and I accept that the staff had a reasonably busy day and, to
that extent, the office could be said to be short of staff. However, I do not accept that
the taskwas as onerous as he suggested. The taskof searching is simple because the
layout of the registers is such that the position of the certifier’s name is always the same.
On each open double page of the register, the searcher can run a finger across the
page, about two-thirds of the way down, where the certifier’s name is readily visible.
Moreover, as is a point of professional competence and pride among registrars, the
writing in the registers I saw was always clearly legible.
4.27 Mrs McCann said that it was possible to search a register in about five minutes. She
had timed herself. She said that, whenever she was asked to search a register, she
would always do so twice. She was of the view that it would take about ten minutes to
search a full register twice. Mr Loader said that it would take about 40 minutes to check
a register once and agreed that normal practice would require a double check.
Mrs Burns said it would take her about 15 minutes to do a double check of one register.
Because of the differences between the various witnesses, I timed the taskmyself and
found I could make one check in seven minutes. I think Mr Loader gave a gross
overestimate. I thinkperhaps Mrs McCann works faster than I could and possibly faster
than other register office staff. However, I do not thinkit would take more than about
15 minutes to do a double checkof each full register and to note any relevant entries
either by placing a marker in the register or by recording the entry numbers in a list.
In fact, in this search, the current registers were not full and only part of each deposited
register had to be searched, because DI Smith only wished the search to go backsix
months. I conclude that the search could not have taken more than two man-hours and,
given the experience of the staff involved, may well have taken less. However, I do
accept that there were other tasks to be carried out that afternoon and no one was free
to sit down and go through registers without having to attend to other matters. It may
well be that members of staff had to breakoff in the middle of a register to attend to
another task. Opportunities for error arise in such circumstances, although a mistake
should be picked up when the second check is made.
Who Searched Which Register?
4.28 Initially, there was some uncertainty about who had taken part in the search. However,
once the time of the search had been established, it was clear that only four members
of staff were present during the Wednesday afternoon: Mr Loader, Mrs McCann,
Miss Partoon and Mrs Burns. Mrs Burns, who, as I have said, seemed to have the
clearest recollection, said that she remembered taking part in a search in the secure
storeroom. Mr Loader was also involved and Miss Partoon was in the room at some
stage.
4.29 Mr Loader said that, when organising the search, he would have asked all those
members of staff who had the time to search the registers, to take photocopies of any
45
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
relevant entries and put them in a pile in the storeroom. The photocopier was situated
in the storeroom. Mr Loader could not remember who had taken part in the search or
whether he had actually searched any registers himself but accepted that he probably
did. He was adamant that he would have searched only the deposited registers, not
the current ones. He said that he would have asked each registrar who was at work
that day to search her own current register. Mrs McCann, who kept Register A and
Miss Partoon, who kept Register B, were both working that afternoon. Mrs Craven, who
kept Register C, was absent from work at this time. Mrs Dewhurst, who kept Register
D, worked part-time and was not at work on the day of the search, although she would
have been in the office the following morning.
4.30 If Mr Loader is right, Mrs McCann and Miss Partoon would have searched their own
current registers. Mr Loader maintained that it would not have been appropriate for him
to search any current register, as he was not the custodian of the current registers, only
of the deposited registers. The registrars were the custodians of their own current
registers. The registrars agreed that they are the custodians of their current registers
but said that they had never heard the suggestion that it would be inappropriate for
Mr Loader to search their current registers if it was not convenient for them to do so
themselves.
4.31 Mrs McCann was adamant that she did not search her current register or take part in
the search at all. She had no recollection of doing so and believed she would have
remembered such an unusual request. She was very busy that day. She registered six
deaths during the day and also officiated at a marriage ceremony, which tookher out
of her office from shortly before 2.30pm until about 3pm. Mrs McCann was of the view
that it was likely that someone came into her office while she was officiating at the
marriage and searched her register. She said it would be entirely appropriate for
someone else to search her register in her absence. She would have expected
Mr Loader to do it. In passing, she pointed out that, considering her position
hypothetically, had she been asked to search for entries relating to deaths certified by
Shipman, she would hardly have failed to notice and include the entry for Mrs Marley,
whose death she had registered that very day. Mrs McCann cannot remember whether
that death was registered before or after she conducted the marriage ceremony but,
from its position in the register, it seems very likely that it was before.
4.32 Miss Partoon also had a busy day. She registered nine births. She was also the
‘nominated officer’ for that day, which involved additional administrative tasks besides
registrations. She said that she remembered walking into the storeroom and seeing
Mrs Burns and Mr Loader engaged in a search of registers. Mrs Burns told her what was
happening. She could not remember taking part in a search in that room. She thought it
unlikely that Mr Loader would have asked her to help in the storeroom unless he was
‘really struggling’. Nor did she thinkit likely that she would have offered to help, as she
was so busy with registrations and her nominated officer duties. She acknowledged that
her current register was searched and thought it likely that she searched it herself. She
said that she did not recall searching either Mrs McCann’s or Mrs Craven’s current
register and thought she would have remembered it, had she done so. When she
checked her own register, her method of work would be to do a double check and to
46
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
put a marker in the relevant pages or make a list of entries. If she had put markers in
the register, the logical thing would have been for her to take her register to the
photocopier in the storeroom and make the copies herself. However, she has no
recollection of doing that and believes it is more likely that she made a list of entries
and gave it to someone else to photocopy. She said that registrars are trained to be very
careful and accurate and she could not understand how anyone could checkthrough a
register and miss as many as six relevant entries.
4.33 Mrs Burns worked in the general office unless she was needed as a deputy registrar.
On Wednesday, 25th March, it appears that her only duty as a deputy registrar was to
assist Mrs McCann at the marriage ceremony at 2.30pm. Like Mrs McCann, Mrs Burns
would have been occupied with that from just before 2.30pm until about 3pm. Mrs Burns
recollected taking part in the search of deposited registers in the storeroom that
afternoon. She remembered searching the register that recorded the death of
Mrs Bianka Pomfret. She knew Mrs Pomfret and it came as a shock to learn of her death.
Mrs Burns must have been searching register D49, Mrs Dewhurst’s last deposited
register. Mrs Burns could not remember whether or not she searched any other register.
I thinkit likely that she did. She said that she certainly did not search any current
registers. She thought she would have remembered that. She remembered that, at some
stage, Miss Partoon came into the storeroom to give some help. Mrs Burns’ method of
searching a register would be to make a double check and to write down the numbers
of the relevant entries on a piece of paper. She was adamant that she did not make
any photocopies; she would definitely have made a list and given it to Mr Loader.
4.34 It is far from clear who checked each of the three registers from which entries might
have been missed. It is possible, but unlikely, that Mrs McCann searched her own
current register. If, as seems likely, it was searched while Mrs McCann was officiating
at the marriage, Mrs Burns cannot have searched it, as she was with Mrs McCann. It
is unlikely that Miss Partoon searched it. I think it is most likely that Mr Loader searched
it. I do not thinkit was in any way inappropriate for him to do so. I reject his evidence
on that point. I thinkit is far more likely that he would search it himself than that he would
have asked a deputy registrar to do so, as he claimed he would have done. In any
event, there was no deputy registrar available while the marriage was taking place. I
reach the same conclusions in respect of Mrs Craven’s current register; I think
Mr Loader probably searched it. I note also that Mr Loader was the only person with
no specific duties that afternoon. I am not saying that he did not have other duties but
I thinkhe had more time for the search than the others. As for Miss Partoon’s deposited
register, it seems likely that this was searched by either Mr Loader or Mrs Burns and I
cannot say who was the more likely to have done so. If, as Mr Loader says, it is unlikely
that more than one person would make an error, it would seem that he is the one most
likely to have made any errors that occurred. However, that is not necessarily so. In any
event, it is possible that errors arose, not at the checking stage, but during
photocopying. I am satisfied that Mr Loader did most, if not all, of the photocopying. I
am quite satisfied by Mrs Burns’ evidence that she did not do her own photocopying.
4.35 Although all the register office staff stressed that care and accuracy are of fundamental
importance in their work, I did have the distinct impression that the way in which this
47
SHIP02$$10 14-04-03 10:14:18 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P004 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
taskof searching was carried out left room for mistakes. I have little doubt that both
Mr Loader and Mrs Burns had to breakoff from their searches to do other duties,
including attending to members of the public who came into the office. Mrs Burns
probably had to breakoff the search to undertake her duties at the marriage ceremony.
It is quite likely that Mr Loader had to break off while photocopying. These interruptions
do not make errors inevitable but they do make them more likely.
Conclusion
4.36 After reviewing the whole of the evidence on this topic, I conclude that it is more likely
that there were errors in the register office, so that an incomplete bundle of copy death
certificates was given to DI Smith, than that he lost some certificates soon after collecting
them. However, my conclusion is not certain. If my conclusion is correct, it seems to
me likely that Mr Loader was responsible for the errors. It is possible that Mrs Burns
may have made some contribution.
4.37 I do not thinkthat a high degree of blame should attach to Mr Loader. I am not
sufficiently certain that he was directly responsible for the errors to suggest that he
should be censured. I had the impression that he is generally a conscientious man who
is something of a stickler for rules and regulations. I think it likely that he made an error
or series of errors, most likely because he was under pressure.
4.38 I thinkit would have been prudent for Mr Loader to keep a record of which copy
certificates he provided to DI Smith. He was aware that the police request was important
and that a confidential investigation was being carried out, although I accept that he
did not realise that the police suspected that Shipman might have been murdering a
number of his patients. He regarded all searches performed for the police as important.
He knew that this request was unusual and that the Coroner was involved in the enquiry.
If DI Smith’s request had been dealt with in a more formal manner, the later uncertainties
would have been avoided.
4.39 For reasons that I shall explain in Chapters Five and Fifteen, I thinkit unlikely that the
errors made in the register office had any effect on the outcome of the investigation.
48
SHIP02$$11 14-04-03 10:19:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER FIVE
The Next Steps in the Investigation
The First Progress Report
5.1 As I have said, Detective Inspector Smith made his first informal report to Chief
Superintendent Sykes in the late afternoon of 24th March or the following morning. At some
time on 25th March, CS Sykes telephoned Mr Pollard to tell him that DI Smith had seen
Dr Reynolds. Mr Pollard’s note does not record the time of this conversation but says only
that DI Smith had found that Shipman was running an appeal for a scanner and that most
of the deceased were ‘making legacies’. The police would ‘therefore [in fact, a symbol
meaning ‘therefore’] pursue’ the investigation. This seems to imply that DI Smith would not
have proceeded with his investigation had he not found out about the scanner appeal,
which might appear to provide some sort of financial motive for Shipman killing his
patients. However, CS Sykes said in evidence that the investigation was to proceed in any
event and Mr Pollard accepted that his note did not give a true impression. I feel bound
to infer that the only factor that CS Sykes mentioned to Mr Pollard was the scanner appeal
and it seems likely that CS Sykes’ interest in it was a reflection of the significance that
DI Smith attached to the information. It appears that DI Smith may have been looking for
a motive rather than gathering evidence. It is clear that there was no discussion during this
conversation about the possibility of arranging an autopsy on the body of one or more of
Shipman’s recently deceased patients.
Detective Inspector Smith Collects the Certificates
5.2 In the late afternoon of 25th March or, more likely, on the morning of 26th March, DI Smith
collected the bundle of copy death certificates from the register office. He then returned
to Ashton police station and sorted the certificates into date order. At some stage (possibly
immediately after his return but certainly within a day or two), he prepared his written list
or chart of all the deaths of which he was aware. That written chart was later abandoned
in favour of the computer spreadsheet: see Appendix B. The computer spreadsheet
contains the names of 19 deceased patients, listed in order of the date of death. It does
not contain the name of Miss Ada Warburton.
5.3 I have already mentioned DI Smith’s conflicting accounts as to how many certificates he
received from the register office at the time of his second visit. In August 1998, he said that
he had been given 19 certificates on that day. To Detective Superintendent Ellis in April
2000, he said that he had received about 10 or 12 certificates on that occasion and, some
days later, was given a few more, making 19 in all. In August 2000, he said he had
collected 17 at his second visit and received two more later. He repeated that account in
his first two Inquiry statements. These changes seemed to demonstrate nothing more than
that DI Smith did not have a clear recollection of how many certificates he received and
when. This is not surprising, as he made no contemporaneous record.
5.4 In his third Inquiry statement, however, signed on 27th May 2002, the day on which he
began his oral evidence, DI Smith claimed for the first time that he had received
49
SHIP02$$11 14-04-03 10:19:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
20 copy certificates, all on the same occasion. The exact number of certificates he
received would not greatly matter, save that DI Smith’s credibility is under scrutiny. If
he received only 19 certificates, as his spreadsheet suggested, that of Miss Warburton
would not have been among them. But, if he received 20 certificates rather than 19,
he must have received hers. During his oral evidence, Leading Counsel to the Inquiry
suggested to DI Smith that his claim to have received 20 certificates, rather than 19,
was a recent invention, designed to explain how he had come to learn of the death of
Miss Warburton. It will be recalled that DI Smith denied that Dr Reynolds had told him
of this death at a time when her body had not yet been cremated. It was suggested by
Counsel that DI Smith was anxious to persuade the Inquiry that he had not learned of
the death from Dr Reynolds because he hoped to avoid the criticism that he had failed
to take any steps to arrange an autopsy of her body.
5.5 I have already said that I have found that Dr Reynolds did tell DI Smith about
Miss Warburton’s death. However, as there is further relevant evidence to be reviewed, I
shall defer the full explanation for that conclusion until Chapter Eleven. There is also further
evidence to consider relating to the question of whether Mr Loader provided 19 or 20 copy
certificates to DI Smith. My conclusion is that he provided 19 but I shall defer the full
explanation for that conclusion until later.
The Significance ofthe Number ofDeaths
5.6 DI Smith claimed in oral evidence that, after receiving the copy death certificates, he
thought that, as there were only 20 (or 19) deaths over the last six months, this ‘brought
down the average’ death rate among Shipman’s patients below that which Dr Reynolds
had suggested for a three-month period. He said that he assumed that Mr Loader had
given him all the relevant copy certificates. That was a reasonable assumption. He said
that it did not strike him that there was any inconsistency between the number of copy
certificates that Mr Loader had provided and the information from Dr Reynolds. This, he
said, was because he did not know on which three-month period Dr Reynolds’ figures
were based.
5.7 I doubt that DI Smith noticed that the average death rate over the six-month period
appeared to be lower than the rate described by Dr Reynolds. If he had, he would also
have noticed the marked imbalance between the two periods: 16 deaths in one threemonth
period and only three or four in the other. If, as he assumed, Mr Loader had indeed
provided all the certificates for the six-month period, the imbalance would be so marked
that it would appear likely that Dr Reynolds had overstated the number of deaths in
whatever period of three months she was using. Yet DI Smith did not think of returning to
Dr Reynolds to ask her to check her figures or to allow him to see the records from which
she had taken them.
5.8 DI Smith said that he could not remember his thought processes at this time but postulated
that either he concluded that Dr Reynolds’ figures were overstated (and did nothing about
it) or he thought that both Dr Reynolds’ figures and those from the register office were right.
50
SHIP02$$11 14-04-03 10:19:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
This, he thought, could have been the case if there had been a lot more deaths in one
period of three months than the other.
5.9 Whatever his thought processes at the time, it is clear to me that DI Smith did not think
carefully about the information he had received from Mr Loader when compared with
that provided by Dr Reynolds. Either he did not notice any potential inconsistency at all
or, if he did, he explained it to himself without giving it careful thought. This is consistent
with his own admission that he did not regard the death rate as being of any particular
importance. I am satisfied that he never understood its significance.
5.10 It follows that DI Smith did not realise that it would be necessary for him to investigate
the validity of or basis for Dr Reynolds’ concern about the death rate. I think he
understood that she was concerned because the death rate was high; that was one of
the things that had prompted her to make her report. But he thought that her real
concern was that Shipman was killing his patients and that his task was to investigate
these suspected murders. I think he believed that he should investigate them in the
same way as he investigated other murders, i.e. by taking evidence from people who
could speak directly of a killing of which they knew. Of course, he could not approach
this investigation in that usual way. No crimes had been reported. He could not speak
to the relatives to find out what they knew of Shipman’s involvement in the deaths. He
could not speak to members of Shipman’s practice staff. He could not speak to funeral
directors, save for the one known to have expressed concern.
5.11 DI Smith’s view of what he should do was misconceived. He did not realise that he ought
to find out whether the death rate among Shipman’s patients was abnormally high and
whether, if it was, it suggested unlawful conduct. I do not think he realised that it would be
possible to find out what the usual death rate was and to compare it with that in Shipman’s
practice.
5.12 It is unfortunate that DI Smith did not appreciate the importance of the death rate. If he had
done so, he would have realised that the number of copy death certificates he had
received was not readily compatible with Dr Reynolds’ information and he would have
gone back to her to check the accuracy of her figures. Had he done so, he would have
found that her records contained the names of deceased patients about whom he had not
been told by the register office. He would immediately have realised that he was short of
certificates. The register office’s error would have been discovered. A second search
would have been made and I have little doubt that more copy certificates would have been
produced.
5.13 It is because DI Smith did not appreciate the importance of the number of deaths, or the
comparative death rates of the two practices, that I have concluded that the error made
by the register office staff had no significant effect on the outcome of the investigation. I
think that DI Smith asked for the copy death certificates because the Coroner (or possibly
someone else) had suggested that he should do so. It seemed a good place to start. But
if Mr Loader had handed him 31 certificates, instead of 19 or 20, I am satisfied that it would
not have made any real difference to DI Smith’s approach to his task. I do not think he
would have tried to find someone who could tell him whether the death rates were
abnormal or worryingly high.
51
SHIP02$$11 14-04-03 10:19:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P005 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
The Death ofMrs Martha Marley
5.14 I mentioned earlier that DI Smith did not make any arrangement with Dr Reynolds about
what was to happen in the event that Shipman made any further requests for a Form C to
be signed. This omission was, in the event, of particular significance because, during the
afternoon of 24th March (the day on which DI Smith met Dr Reynolds), Shipman killed
again. At 6.45pm, Mrs Martha Marley was found dead. She was found sitting in her chair,
wearing her day clothes and looking peaceful. Shipman certified that her death was due
to old age. In fact, she had been well the day before. In other words, if enquiries had been
made about this death, it might well have been recognised as an example of the type of
death that had given rise to Mrs Bambroffe’s concerns. [My decision about the death of
Mrs Marley is in Volume Five of my First Report. I found that Shipman killed her.]
5.15 On 26th March, Dr Patel completed the Form C for Mrs Marley. He told the Inquiry that
Shipman came across to the Brooke Practice Surgery with the medical notes and told him
about the medical history while Dr Patel was looking at Form B. Shipman told him that
Mrs Marley had declined steadily over the last year. She was 88 at the time of her death.
According to the Form B, Shipman had last seen Mrs Marley 12 days before her death.
The form showed that the body had been discovered, not by Shipman, but by Mrs Marley’s
daughter. The fact that she had died had been confirmed by paramedics. Dr Patel knew
about Mrs Bambroffe’s worries and realised that this death had some of the features that
had given rise to her concerns. Mrs Marley was an elderly female who had been found
dead sitting in a chair. Nevertheless, Dr Patel did not feel that he should refuse to sign the
Form C. There was no medical reason to refuse, either in the history given or on the face
of Form B. A refusal might have drawn Shipman’s attention to the fact that he was under
suspicion. Dr Patel understood that the doctors at the Brooke Practice were expected to
continue to act in the usual way. He did not remember whether this was an instruction from
DI Smith or something the partners had agreed between themselves. He believed that the
police and Coroner would be informed of the death and would be able to make any
enquiries they thought fit. So, Dr Patel went to see the body and then signed Form C.
5.16 I accept Dr Patel’s explanation as truthful and reasonable. Dr Patel is not to be criticised
for signing Mrs Marley’s Form C. In fact, Dr Patel’s assumption was erroneous; the Coroner
and the police were not aware of the death of Mrs Marley. DI Smith remained unaware of
this death throughout his investigation. Mrs Marley was cremated on 31st March.
52
SHIP02$$12 14-04-03 10:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER SIX
The Approach to the Health Authority
Detective Inspector Smith Seeks the Medical Records
6.1 By midday on Thursday, 26th March 1998, Detective Inspector Smith had decided that it
would be a good idea to obtain the medical records of Shipman’s recently deceased
patients. Somebody (he thinks the Coroner) had suggested this course of action to him.
It is possible that this suggestion was made by the Coroner when Chief Superintendent
Sykes spoke to him on 25th March. It is also possible that the Coroner made the suggestion
to DI Smith himself during a telephone call on 26th March. DI Smith said that he spoke to the
Coroner that day, as he had been instructed to keep him informed. The telephone records
confirm a call from DI Smith’s number to the coroner’s office just after midday. However,
Mr Pollard does not think DI Smith spoke to him that day and, in contrast with the other
telephone conversations between these two, Mr Pollard has no note of such a call, so it is
quite possible that DI Smith spoke to a member of the Coroner’s staff. Moreover, Mr Pollard
said that he would not have known where the medical records of deceased people were
kept but thought that his staff might know. I think it likely that the idea of obtaining medical
records came from the Coroner, either directly to DI Smith or indirectly though CS Sykes.
I am also satisfied that, on 26th March, DI Smith learned (probably from a member of the
Coroner’s staff) that the medical records of deceased persons would be in the possession
of the WPHA.
6.2 Shortly after his telephone call to the coroner’s office, DI Smith telephoned Selbourne
House, the Hyde office of the WPHA. He must have enquired about the procedure for
obtaining the medical records of deceased patients. He was referred to Mrs Parkinson,
who was then the Consumer Liaison Manager and was responsible for dealing with
requests for access to medical records. DI Smith made an appointment to see
Mrs Parkinson at 2.15pm that afternoon and noted the time and place on the right-hand
page of his daybook: see Appendix A. I do not think that DI Smith had a very clear
understanding of why it would be a good idea to obtain the records or what he would do
with them when he got them.
The Relevant Health Authority Personnel
6.3 Before describing DI Smith’s meeting with Mrs Parkinson, it is convenient to explain the
functions of the various WPHA personnel who were to become involved with DI Smith’s
request. As Consumer Liaison Manager, Mrs Parkinson’s main jobwas to receive
complaints about doctors and other practitioners (such as opticians) involved in primary
care. She was also responsible for handling requests for access to medical records. Her
line manager was Dr Banks, then Assistant Director of Primary Care and Medical Adviser.
He shared both these positions with Dr Frances Bradshaw. This arrangement had come
about as the result of the amalgamation of two smaller health authorities. Although their
responsibilities were theoretically coterminous, in practice they divided their duties.
Dealing with requests for access to medical records was one of Dr Banks’ responsibilities.
Both Dr Banks and Dr Bradshaw worked from Selbourne House, Hyde. Their line
53
SHIP02$$12 14-04-03 10:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
manager, Mrs Jan Forster, the Director of Primary Care, worked at the main office of the
Health Authority, in Oldham.
6.4 At this time, there was in existence a draft local protocol, ‘Access to Medical Records
Procedures’, defining the process by which requests for access to records should be
handled and the criteria by which requests should be granted or refused. Although the
protocol had not yet been fully approved, Mrs Parkinson was using it as a guideline and
had its provisions in mind when she met DI Smith on 26th March. Mrs Parkinson made a
contemporaneous note of her meeting with DI Smith. A facsimile of the note, together with
other records made by her around this time, can be seen at Appendix C of this Report.
Mrs Parkinson’s evidence about the meeting owes its reliability largely to her note.
DI Smith made no note and his evidence about the meeting is sketchy. In the event of any
conflict or uncertainty, I prefer the evidence of Mrs Parkinson.
Detective Inspector Smith Meets Mrs Parkinson and Dr Bradshaw
6.5 Mrs Parkinson said that DI Smith wanted to know how to gain access to some deceased
patients’ records. He explained that he had been contacted by the Coroner as a result
of concerns expressed by a local general practitioner, whose name was not divulged.
This doctor was concerned about the number of cremation forms s/he had
countersigned for Shipman. There had been 16 in three months. Mrs Parkinson knew
of Shipman but did not know him personally. She knew of him first because he was her
mother’s general practitioner. Second, she had received a number of complaints from
him about the record keeping standards of other general practitioners. This was an
unusual type of complaint and she remembered it. Third, she knew of Shipman’s
reputation within the WPHA as a good doctor and knew also that he was a member of
the Local Medical Committee, a statutory body that represents general practitioners in
dealings with the Health Authority.
6.6 Mrs Parkinson said that DI Smith then told her that all 16 cremations had had similar
features or circumstances. She listed these in her note. The deaths were all of elderly
females; all had been found at their homes by Shipman who had apparently called on
them unannounced; all had been found during the day and in their day clothes; all had
been certified as having died from stroke or heart disease. DI Smith also told her that
Shipman ran a scanner appeal and some of the 16 deceased patients had made
donations to that appeal either before death or by will.
6.7 Although DI Smith had obtained the copy death certificates from the register office, the
figures he quoted to Mrs Parkinson were those provided by Dr Reynolds and did not
represent the content of the bundle of certificates. I infer that, at this time, he had not made
a careful examination of the bundle. However, as will become apparent, he had put them
into chronological order.
6.8 Mrs Parkinson asked if DI Smith had the consent of the next of kin or personal
representatives of the deceased patients to see the medical records. If he had, the draft
protocol would have permitted her to release the records, subject only to a check by
Dr Banks to ensure that there was nothing particularly sensitive within them, which should
54
SHIP02$$12 14-04-03 10:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
not be disclosed. DI Smith did not have such consent and explained why he would be
unable to obtain it; the investigation was confidential and he could not approach the
families.
6.9 Mrs Parkinson was worried by the serious nature of the enquiry and was anxious to assist
DI Smith but did not know what to do. Even if DI Smith had provided a formal letter of
request, the protocol would not have allowed her to release the records. She went in
search of Dr Banks but he was not available. Dr Bradshaw was in the office and went with
Mrs Parkinson to see DI Smith. The whole story was retold. During this second hearing,
Mrs Parkinson realised fully that what was being suggested was that Shipman might be
killing his patients. She was most concerned, as her mother and stepfather were both
patients of Shipman and her mother had given money to his scanner appeal. She told
DI Smith of her worries. She said that he seemed quite ‘laid back’ about it and told her not
to worry. DI Smith agrees that he reassured her. He said he was in a difficult position, as
he did not wish to create alarm, which might be unfounded.
6.10 Dr Bradshaw confirmed to DI Smith that, without the written consent of the next of kin or
personal representatives of the deceased, he could not have access to the medical
records. The position in law is most unsatisfactory. There is no power by which the police
can obtain the release of medical records in the initial stages of a criminal investigation
unless the patient or, if the patient has died, the next of kin consents to their disclosure. It
appears that doctors sometimes exercise a discretion (which I do not think they have) to
disclose records to the police without the consent of the patient or next of kin. Also, it
appears that, in some areas, doctors and health authorities will accede to a letter of
request from the coroner. However, the coroner has no power to order production or
seizure of medical records, at that stage or at any time until inquest. This problem will be
addressed in my Third Report.
6.11 There is some confusion about exactly what was said when it was realised that
Mrs Parkinson could not release the records. The recollections of Dr Bradshaw,
Mrs Parkinson and DI Smith differ and the point is not covered in Mrs Parkinson’s note.
6.12 Dr Bradshaw said that, by the end of the meeting, it had been decided that the relevant
medical records would be collected together and the request for release would then be
put to Dr Banks for decision.
6.13 Mrs Parkinson said that it had been explained to DI Smith that the records could not be
released. It was agreed that Dr Banks would be asked to examine the records himself to
see if they revealed evidence that the deaths shared the common features and
circumstances, identified by DI Smith, which had given rise to concern.
6.14 DI Smith said that Mrs Parkinson suggested that one of the two general practitioner
advisers at Selbourne House might look at the records instead of him taking them away.
He told Mrs Parkinson that he was content with this suggestion and that he would wish the
doctor to see if the records provided any evidence to support the allegations being made.
The salient features to be examined were whether or not Shipman was present at the
death, whether the deceased were found in their day clothes and whether there was any
evidence of them being killed or neglected. He said that, when he left the meeting, it had
55
SHIP02$$12 14-04-03 10:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
been agreed that a doctor would examine the records in accordance with his wishes and
would contact him when the jobhad been done. In his previous accounts, DI Smith had
always maintained that he had asked that the doctor should examine the records to see
if the cause of death was consistent with the treatment previously prescribed. When he
gave oral evidence, his accounts varied. In general, he accepted that he had asked only
that the doctor should search for signs of the common features that had given rise to
concern. However, at other times, he maintained that what he had really wanted was that
the doctor should examine the records for consistency between the cause of death and
the previous treatment.
6.15 I am satisfied that, after a discussion of the problem, it was decided that either
Dr Bradshaw or Mrs Parkinson would tell Dr Banks about DI Smith’s request and, if
Dr Banks were not prepared to agree to release the records themselves, he would be
asked to examine them. In the mind of Mrs Parkinson, who was the person who did in fact
speak to Dr Banks, the purpose for which Dr Banks would look at the records, if he agreed
to do so, was to see whether there was any evidence in them of the common features
which had given rise to concern.
6.16 Before the end of the meeting, Mrs Parkinson agreed to arrange for the relevant records
to be collected together so that they could be shown to Dr Banks. DI Smith had with him
the bundle of certificates from the Tameside register office. He gave Mrs Parkinson the
names, addresses and dates of birth of 17 deceased patients of Shipman. That was the
only information she would need in order to locate the records. She wrote the information
down. The list of names can be seen at Appendix C. The names are listed in chronological
order of death, although Mrs Parkinson did not write down the dates of death or the causes
of death, as recorded on the certificates. DI Smith was adamant that he told Mrs Parkinson
the cause of death in each case but I am quite satisfied that he did not. If he had done,
she would have written down this information.
6.17 Mrs Parkinson warned DI Smith that the records of the patients who had died most recently
might not yet have been returned to the Health Authority. She asked whether she should
request Shipman’s practice to return them immediately. DI Smith told her not to do so, as
Shipman was not to be made aware of the investigation.
6.18 It will be noted that DI Smith did not include in the list he gave to Mrs Parkinson the names
of Mr Harold Eddleston and Miss Maureen Ward. Nor, if he had it, as he claimed in oral
evidence, did he give the name of Miss Ada Warburton. Before the hearings for this part
of the Inquiry began, when DI Smith was contending that he received the certificates in
two batches, he claimed that he omitted the names of Mr Eddleston and Miss Ward
because he had not at that time received their copy death certificates from the register
office. Later, he abandoned that explanation and suggested another reason for their
omission. In oral evidence, he suggested that he omitted them because those two deaths
were certified by Shipman as having been due to cancer; therefore, because they were
not said to be due to coronary thrombosis or stroke, it could be seen without further
examination that they did not conform to the pattern of suspicious deaths. However, some
of the other deaths for which he obtained the records had other causes; for example,
Mrs Elizabeth Battersby was said to have died of a pulmonary embolism, Mrs Bertha Parr
of ‘natural causes’ and Mrs Cissie Davies of bronchopneumonia.
56
SHIP02$$12 14-04-03 10:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
6.19 I am unable to reach a clear conclusion about why DI Smith omitted to mention the names
of Mr Eddleston and Miss Ward and to seek advice about their medical records at this
stage. Neither of the two possible explanations is entirely satisfactory. I do not think
DI Smith received the copy death certificates in two batches; I think he received them all
on his second visit to the register office. He could not identify another visit or any other
means by which they had been conveyed to him. I think the second explanation is the
more plausible. I think DI Smith believed that he was only expected to investigate deaths
that clearly conformed to the pattern of suspicious deaths. It may be that he had got hold
of the idea that only deaths certified as due to stroke or coronary thrombosis were
suspicious; or it is possible that he thought that deaths due to cancer sounded ‘natural’
and should be excluded from his enquiry. In the event, the records of Mr Eddleston did
come to the attention of Dr Banks, although not at the time when he considered the first
tranche of records. How and why they did so remains something of a puzzle.
6.20 DI Smith also suggested, in oral evidence, that he had omitted the name of Miss Warburton
from the list he gave to Mrs Parkinson because her death was so recent that the records
were unlikely to be available. However, Miss Warburton died only a few days after
Mrs Dorothy Long and Mrs Lily Higgins, whose names he included. DI Smith claimed that
he had discussed with Mrs Parkinson and Dr Bradshaw which sets of records should be
sought and they had suggested that those of Mrs Long and Mrs Higgins might be
available but those of Miss Warburton would not. Mrs Parkinson could not recall any such
conversation and Dr Bradshaw said that she was not present when the list was compiled.
I do not think that any such conversation took place.
The Records Are Put Before Dr Banks
6.21 After DI Smith had left, Mrs Parkinson asked a colleague to collect the medical records
together for her and she then kept them in a locked cabinet before passing them on to
Dr Banks. Only 14 sets were found. The records for Mrs Margaret Waldron, Mrs Long and
Mrs Higgins (who had died on 6th, 13th and 17th March 1998 respectively) were still with
Shipman and were not available for examination.
6.22 When Dr Banks returned to the Hyde office later that afternoon, Mrs Parkinson told him
about DI Smith’s visit and request. Neither of them took a note of that conversation and
neither has a clear recollection of what was said. Mrs Parkinson showed Dr Banks her note
of the meeting with DI Smith and told him what had transpired. I am satisfied that Dr Banks
agreed that release of the records was not possible without the consent of relatives or
personal representatives. I am also satisfied that Mrs Parkinson said that DI Smith would
be content not to pursue his request for access to the records if Dr Banks would look at
them to see if they contained evidence of the common features.
6.23 It is clear that Dr Banks agreed to examine the 14 sets of records. He decided to do so
without discussing the wisdom of taking this course with Mrs Forster, his line manager, or
with Dr Ellis Friedman, Director of Public Health Medicine for the WPHA. I will return in due
course to consider whether he should have consulted either or both of those persons.
Dr Banks undertook the task without requiring DI Smith to make a formal written request
and without speaking to DI Smith directly to ensure that he had a full understanding of what
57
SHIP02$$12 14-04-03 10:27:44 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P006 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
was required. Dr Banks claimed, at one stage, that he had asked Mrs Parkinson to find out
exactly what the police wanted. However, he was not certain of this and there is no record
of a telephone call from Selbourne House to the police. Nor did Mrs Parkinson make a note
of any such request from Dr Banks or of its outcome. In my view, it is most unlikely that
Dr Banks sought any clarification of his task.
58
SHIP02$$13 09-04-03 21:08:39 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER SEVEN
The Examination of the Medical Records
Dr Banks’ Functions and his Knowledge of Shipman
7.1 Dr Banks qualified as a doctor in 1973 and, after various training posts, settled into general
practice in Norwich, where he remained for 18years. In 1993, he joined the Tameside
Family Health Services Authority as Medical Director. From April 1996, when the Tameside
and Oldham Family Health Services Authorities were merged and taken over by the new
West Pennine Health Authority, he shared the positions of Medical Adviser and Assistant
Director of Primary Care with Dr Bradshaw. However, his job did not change significantly.
7.2 Dr Banks regarded his position as Medical Adviser as a ‘bridge’ between the local general
practitioners and the Health Authority. His main duties related to the monitoring of
prescribing practices. He would assist in setting the general practitioners’ prescribing
budgets and monitor how they were spent. He would visit general practitioners to advise
them on prescribing practice. There were about 200 general practitioners in the area and
Dr Banks would visit each about once a year, or more, if a doctor were not complying with
what was seen as ‘good prescribing practice’. In this context, Dr Banks had met Shipman
on a number of occasions. Shipman did not always comply with the official guidance on
prescribing. He was unwilling to prescribe generic drugs and preferred to prescribe
various new and expensive products, in particular for the treatment of heart disease and
raised cholesterol levels. Dr Banks had the unenviable task of seeking to persuade
Shipman to reduce his drugs bill, which was consistently 60% above the average for the
Health Authority. He found Shipman difficult to persuade. Shipman would produce
scientific papers showing the efficacy of the drugs in question and would argue for his
right to prescribe them. This type of disagreement and arguments about the sums to be
allowed for the support of Shipman’s practice led to a degree of tension between the two
men. On occasions, Shipman wrote quite strongly worded letters to the Health Authority.
Despite these tensions, Dr Banks respected Shipman. He knew that Shipman was well
liked by his patients and had a high reputation in the area. He thought Shipman had good
staff and ran his practice efficiently.
7.3 Dr Banks’ duties also included the giving of initial advice about any complaint made
against a general practitioner as to whether the complaint contained any substance and
fell within the Health Authority’s remit. The only ground on which the Health Authority could
bring disciplinary proceedings against a general practitioner was for a breach of the
doctor’s Terms of Service. Most general practitioners are self-employed and provide
services to the National Health Service on terms set out in a statutory instrument. The
provisions relating to payment for the various services are set out in the Statement of Fees
and Allowances, generally known as ‘the Red Book’. Dr Banks believed that Shipman was
very knowledgeable about all the rules and regulations applicable to general practice.
7.4 Another aspect of Dr Banks’ work was to represent the WPHA on a number of committees,
including the Local Medical Committee, of which Shipman was a member. On occasion,
the two men were also members of the same panels interviewing applicants for vacancies
in single-handed practices.
59
SHIP02$$13 09-04-03 21:08:39 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
7.5 Dr Banks was aware that Shipman had previously been a member of the Donneybrook
Practice. It will be recalled that Shipman was a member of that practice from 1977 until
1992. Dr Banks believed that Shipman had left following a disagreement about
fundholding. (In fact, there had been no disagreement until after Shipman had announced
his intention to leave.) As time went on, Dr Banks became aware of the mutual dislike which
Shipman and his former colleagues at the Donneybrook Practice felt for each other. Later,
he learned that there had been a financial problem between Shipman and the other
doctors. Shipman told Dr Banks that the others had ‘robbed him’. Then Dr Banks heard
the Donneybrook doctors’ side of the story and learned that the dispute had been about
the division of a tax bill. When, on a prescribing visit in about 1997, Shipman spoke to him
about his former colleagues, Dr Banks was surprised by the strength of feeling he seemed
still to have, five years later. He had the impression that Shipman hated the Donneybrook
doctors, almost venomously.
7.6 By 1998, Dr Banks’ view of Shipman was that he was an able man and a good doctor but
was arrogant, prickly and difficult to deal with.
Dr Banks’ Understanding of his Task
7.7 As I have mentioned, one of Dr Banks’ duties related to the handling of requests for access
to medical records. Although such requests were dealt with in the first instance by
Mrs Parkinson, Dr Banks had two roles. If Mrs Parkinson were in doubt about whether a
request should be granted, she would refer it to Dr Banks for decision. Further, in cases
where the request would clearly be granted, Dr Banks would examine the records to
ensure that there was no sensitive material within them that ought not to be disclosed. He
was therefore accustomed to reading medical records kept by other general practitioners.
He was familiar with some of the computer systems then in use, although not the Microdoc
software system used by Shipman. He was quite experienced at deciphering doctors’
handwriting and abbreviations.
7.8Dr Banks recalled that, when Mrs Parkinson told him about Detective Inspector Smith’s
request for access to records, he agreed that, as the police could not provide the consents
necessary for release of the records, he would be prepared to look at them himself. He
could not remember being handed Mrs Parkinson’s note of her conversation with DI Smith
but is confident that he must have looked at it. He thought that the police wanted
information about the cause of death, the place of death and who was present around the
time of death. He was handed 14 sets of records. He was not given any separate
information about the causes of death as certified by Shipman. His task was to look in the
records for the features that Mrs Parkinson had noted. He was to see whether the
information in the records fitted with that pattern of features. He understood that he was
looking to see if the features were present in all cases.
7.9 Dr Banks said that, although he saw the number of deaths recorded by Mrs Parkinson in
her note (16 cremations among Shipman’s patients in three months), that number did not
strike a chord in his mind as being high. If he had thought about it, he would have realised
that this number might be only a proportion of the deaths among Shipman’s patients and
that there would be other deceased patients who had been buried or whose deaths had
60
SHIP02$$13 09-04-03 21:08:39 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
been certified by a hospital doctor or the coroner. However, he did not think about that.
He said that he had very little knowledge of death rates and did not know the annual crude
death rate for patients in UK general practice. Nor did he know the proportion of deaths
usually followed by burial and cremation. Dr Banks realised that the 14 sets of records he
was asked to look at were from a list of 17 deaths that had occurred over a period of six
months. He said that he noticed that 17 deaths over six months represented a much lower
death rate than 16 deaths over three months, as noted by Mrs Parkinson. However, he
assumed that the initial figures given to Mrs Parkinson must be wrong. It did not occur to
him to ask that the figures for deaths of patients in Shipman’s practice be checked either
by DI Smith or using data held by the Health Authority, as would have been possible. Nor
did he think of finding out what the ‘usual’ death rate was.
7.10 Dr Banks claimed that he did not realise that the police request was connected with a
report that Shipman was suspected of killing his patients. I find that most surprising.
Mrs Parkinson knew the nature of the underlying concern. She knew Dr Banks very well.
They saw each other every day at work and were on good terms. It seems highly likely that
she would have told him what she knew of the underlying nature of the concerns and of
the fact that she was worried because her own mother was a patient of Shipman. In any
event, I would have expected Dr Banks to realise that there was a suspicion that Shipman
was harming his patients. Why else would the police and Coroner be involved? Why else
would the police mention that Shipman had had 16 cremations in three months? Why else
had the police bothered to mention the scanner appeal and the fact that some of the
deceased had made donations to it? It seems to me that he must have known.
7.11 When pressed by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry about his insistence that he did not
understand what lay behind the police enquiries, Dr Banks acknowledged that it was
possible that he had understood on a rational level the suggestion that was being made
but found it too incredible to contemplate. At one stage, he described the suggestion that
Shipman was harming his patients as ‘just too incredible a leap from one’s belief system’.
Dr Banks also said that he had had no previous experience of the type of concern raised
by the unknown general practitioner and he had not previously known of one doctor
complaining about another’s incompetence. He said that he thought it almost
inconceivable that Shipman would harm his patients. It occurred to him that the report
made to the Coroner might have been malicious and might even have been made by one
of the Donneybrook doctors with whom Shipman had ‘fallen out’. He agreed that it was
possible that he might have dismissed the allegation as mischief making.
7.12 I find that Dr Banks must have known that the police investigation related to the possibility
that Shipman was killing his patients, either deliberately or by gross negligence. However,
he found the suggestion quite incredible and it is doubtful that he contemplated it as a real
possibility.
7.13 Dr Banks took the records home with him and worked on them during the evening of
Thursday, 26th March. The following morning, he returned to his office and completed the
task that day. He estimated that he spent about five hours on the task, including the
preparation of a chart on which he entered his findings. That chart can be seen as
Appendix D to this Report.
61
SHIP02$$13 09-04-03 21:08:39 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
7.14 Dr Banks said that his main task, as he understood it, was to see whether the medical
records confirmed or denied the presence in all the deaths of the pattern of features that
Mrs Parkinson had noted. I accept that that was what he thought he had to do. The
headings of his chart are consistent with an investigation into the presence or absence of
those features. The headings were the name and date of birth, the date of death, ‘CAUSE
[meaning cause of death]’ and ‘Where’. Dr Banks intended to use that last column to
record the place of death. However, he agreed that he had rather lost sight of where the
death had occurred and instead used this column to record miscellaneous items of
information, often relating to the medical history. The final column was headed ‘Who Saw
[meaning who was present at or about the time of death]’. Dr Banks said that, in addition
to looking for the common features, he also looked to see if the cause of death, as given in
the records, was generally compatible with the medical history. He did not have the death
certificates and did not know the causes of death certified by Shipman.
Dr Banks’ Conclusions
7.15 On the afternoon of 27th March, Dr Banks was working on his computer in his office at
Selbourne House and had the records about him on the floor. Mrs Parkinson asked him if
he had found anything of concern and noted his response: see Appendix C. She wrote
that Dr Banks had gone through the records and had not seen any evidence of anything
odd. Most of the cases involved patients who had been treated for diabetes or high blood
pressure. Two had been found by ambulancemen, two by the deputising service and one
by the deceased’s son. Mrs Parkinson wrote, in capital letters, ‘NO 2 CASES ARE THE
SAME’. She added: ‘Only concern is that in a couple of cases, Dr Banks felt
insufficient history to make an accurate diagnosis’. Mrs Parkinson recalled that, when
Dr Banks told her about the ‘couple of cases’ in which there was insufficient history in the
records to make an accurate diagnosis, he said that he would have expected the doctor
to refer those deaths to the coroner.
7.16 In evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Banks confirmed that his findings were that no two cases
were the same. No single feature was present in every case. This is consistent with what
he must have told Mrs Parkinson. He said that there were ‘a few’ cases in which the
evidence in the records was not such as to permit a diagnosis of the cause of death. He
was concerned about those cases. It is not possible to identify, from the entries on his
chart, the deaths about which Dr Banks was concerned. Dr Banks suggested that the
expression ‘a couple of cases’ was probably intended to mean ‘a few’ rather than ‘two’.
He was of the view that these deaths should have been reported to the coroner. He found
it difficult to say now which cases had given rise to this concern. However, eventually, he
said that he was sure he had mentioned to DI Smith the cases of Miss Mabel Shawcross,
Mrs Cissie Davies and Mrs Winifred Healey. He agreed that an MCCD should not have
been signed in the case of Mrs Bertha Parr but did not claim that he had mentioned this
to DI Smith. He also identified a number of other cases in which, on the information
available, he personally would not have certified the cause of death but would have
reported to the coroner. He was less clear about whether he had mentioned these to
DI Smith. In the light of Mrs Parkinson’s note, it seems unlikely that he did.
62
SHIP02$$13 09-04-03 21:08:39 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
7.17 He said that, although he thought there were ‘a few’ cases that should have been reported
to the coroner, this did not strike him as significant or worrying. He said it had not occurred
to him that a doctor who was killing his patients might wish to avoid a referral to the coroner.
I find that remark most surprising and it seems to me to demonstrate that Dr Banks had
not opened his mind to the possibility that Shipman might be killing his patients. Dr Banks
added that he had found that most of the causes of death recorded in the notes were
broadly consistent with the medical history.
7.18During the afternoon of Friday, 27th March, Mrs Parkinson telephoned DI Smith’s number.
The call lasted only 21 seconds. I think it likely that DI Smith was not available and
Mrs Parkinson left a message on his answerphone. DI Smith was off duty over the
weekend of 28th and 29th March. Early on Monday morning, 30th March, he telephoned the
Health Authority number. I am satisfied that, on that occasion, he spoke to Mrs Parkinson
and arranged to attend Selbourne House at 10.30am on Wednesday, 1st April to receive
the results of Dr Banks’ examination of the records.
63
SHIP02P007 09-04-03 21:08:39 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P007 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 3
SHIP02$$14 09-04-03 21:09:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER EIGHT
Further Enquiries
What Detective Inspector Smith Probably Didfrom 27th to 31st March
8.1 There is no clear evidence that Detective Inspector Smith was actively engaged on his
investigation into Dr Reynolds’ concerns on Friday, 27th, Monday, 30th or Tuesday,
31st March 1998. No telephone calls relevant to this investigation are recorded, save for
the brief call to Mrs Parkinson on 30th March. DI Smith might have been engaged on a
different enquiry, although he did not think that he was. He might have worked on other
police duties of a routine nature. However, at some stage, DI Smith undertook some further
enquiries into Shipman and it seems likely that they were made during this period.
8.2 DI Smith said that he asked the Charities Commission whether a scanner appeal run by
Shipman was registered as a charity. He found that it was not. The Charities Commission
has no record of his enquiry.
8.3 DI Smith also recounted how he attempted to discover whether the police had attended
any of the deaths of which he was aware. When a sudden death occurs, the police are
frequently called. If necessary, they will trace and notify the deceased’s next of kin.
Provided that there are no obviously suspicious circumstances surrounding the death,
they will also try to contact the deceased person’s general practitioner to see if s/he is
prepared to issue an MCCD. If the doctor agrees to do so, then police involvement comes
to an end. However, an incident log recording the attendance of the police is made and
retained. For the first 28 days after the death, the log is readily available on the police
computer. After 28 days, the log is archived and the process of recovery is more timeconsuming.
In the archive, each topic has a code reference; the code for sudden death
reports was, at the time, 84.
8.4 DI Smith said that he retrieved two or three incident logs relating to deaths of Shipman’s
patients which had occurred within the previous 28 days but found no evidence of
suspicious circumstances. DI Smith seems to have thought that this showed that the
deaths were not in fact suspicious. However, given the nature of the suspicion against
Shipman, that he might be killing his patients by giving them a drug of some kind, one
would not expect to find overt evidence of suspicious circumstances in a sudden death
report. The potential value of these reports to DI Smith’s investigation into Shipman was
that they identified the police officer who had attended the scene of the death. That officer
would have seen the body and might have had the opportunity to speak to a relative or
neighbour who knew something of the circumstances surrounding the death. As DI Smith
needed information about the individual deaths but could not approach relatives, he
should have recognised the potential benefit of contacting the officers who had attended
the deaths. Some of them might well have remembered information which was not
recorded in the incident log.
8.5 DI Smith did not speak to the police officers who had completed the incident logs he
retrieved. Moreover, he chose not to attempt to recover the archived logs. He said he
regarded the coding system as unreliable. That it may have been, and it is possible that
65
SHIP02$$14 09-04-03 21:09:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
an archive search would not have produced all the relevant incident logs. However, it
would have produced some. The Inquiry caused a search of the archive for the six-month
period in which DI Smith was interested. Incident logs were found for seven of the
20 deaths of which DI Smith became aware. Examination of the documents themselves
would have revealed that all the deceased patients were women. One was said to have
been found sitting in a chair. Others were said to have been on the floor. In six of the seven
cases, it was apparent that the doctor (Shipman) had been willing to issue an MCCD. In
other words, it was clear that none of those six deaths was referred to the coroner.
8.6 If DI Smith had bothered to find these reports and to speak to the officers who had
attended the scenes of the deaths, he would have obtained a wealth of useful information.
He would have learned of the position of the deceased, whether they were in day clothes
and whether they were showing signs of illness before death. He might well have
discovered whether relatives and friends regarded the death as sudden and unexpected.
In my view, the unreliability of the coding system was not a valid reason for DI Smith’s
decision not to make the attempt. This was an important opportunity to obtain evidence
about the deaths without breaching the requirement of confidentiality imposed by the
Coroner at his original meeting with Chief Superintendent Sykes and DI Smith.
8.7 DI Smith also checked the Greater Manchester Police Integrated Computer System
(GMPICS) to see whether there was any intelligence known about Shipman. He found that
there was not. However, he did not access the Police National Computer (PNC) to
ascertain whether Shipman had any previous convictions. He said that he forgot to do so.
He also remarked that a check of the PNC was less convenient than one on the local
system. However, he well knew that GMPICS would cover only intelligence and
information about matters that had occurred in the Manchester area. I doubt that he forgot
to search the PNC and think it more likely that he thought his search of GMPICS would be
adequate, because a man like Shipman would not have any criminal convictions. This is
borne out by a short passage in the Ellis report, to which I shall refer later, from which I infer
that DI Smith told Detective Superintendent Ellis that he had made a conscious decision
not to search the PNC. Had DI Smith searched the PNC, he would have discovered that
Shipman had previous convictions for drugs offences involving dishonesty, committed in
the early 1970s.
8.8 DI Smith claimed that knowledge of these convictions would not have affected his view of
Shipman; the offences were a very long time ago and, he said, it is not uncommon to find
doctors who have stolen drugs. I cannot accept that evidence. Shipman had a very high
reputation and, in my view, the discovery that he had previous convictions would have
come as a great surprise to anyone, including DI Smith. Examination of the record would
have revealed that the offences had taken place over a considerable period of time and
involved acts of dishonesty. Of course, the knowledge that Shipman had past drugs
convictions would not immediately lead to the conclusion that he was killing his patients.
However, it would have meant that his reputation was called into question. When
considered together with the suspicion that he might be killing his patients by giving them
some sort of drug, as Dr Reynolds had suggested, knowledge of these convictions would
have raised the index of suspicion of any reasonable police officer.
66
SHIP02$$14 09-04-03 21:09:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
8.9 DI Smith said that he did not contact the General Medical Council (GMC) in connection
with his enquiries into Shipman. At one stage, the Inquiry considered that he might have
done, as a telephone call was made to the GMC from Ashton police station at 9.09am on
14th April. It lasted only 52 seconds. However, DI Smith said that he did not make this call
in connection with Shipman. The call might have been made by him or by another officer
in connection with another case. The GMC has no record of the call, which, they say, must,
from its length, have been a routine enquiry. DI Smith ought to have asked the GMC
whether Shipman had been the subject of disciplinary proceedings. This enquiry should
be made as a matter of routine in any criminal investigation into the conduct of a doctor.
Had he made a proper formal enquiry and had the GMC been prepared to assist, it may
be that DI Smith would have found out about Shipman’s convictions through that route.
What Detective Inspector Smith DidNot Do During the Same Period
8.10 During this period at the end of March, DI Smith did not attempt to locate or interview the
unknown female undertaker. She was plainly an important potential witness, provided that
she was willing to speak to him. He had no reason to suppose that she would not; he knew
only that she did not wish her identity to be disclosed. It is hard to understand why DI Smith
did not request Dr Reynolds to ask ‘the unknown undertaker’ whether she would speak to
him in confidence. He said that he asked Police Constable (PC) Peter Napier, a coroner’s
liaison officer, if he knew of any female undertakers. PC Napier gave him two or three
names, including that of ‘Debbie Massey’ (now Mrs Bambroffe). However, PC Napier said
that he did not provide Mrs Bambroffe’s name. PC Napier said that, on 24th March (which
was the first day of the investigation), he had passed DI Smith in the corridor at Ashton
police station. DI Smith had asked him if he knew of any female undertakers in Hyde.
PC Napier said that he gave DI Smith one name, but not that of Mrs Bambroffe because
he thought, erroneously, that she was only an employee, and not a principal, of the firm of
Masseys. However, there is no evidence that DI Smith contacted any of the female
undertakers named by PC Napier.
Reporting andSupervision
8.11 CS Sykes said that it was usual practice for DI Smith to come to his room each morning to
discuss current matters. These morning meetings occurred during this period but were
not specifically related to the Shipman investigation, which would be mentioned briefly.
CS Sykes remembered hearing that DI Smith had obtained some documents, probably
the copy death certificates, but said he did not know about his attempts to obtain the
medical records. It appears that there was never any in-depth discussion of the issues
between the two men. CS Sykes said that it did not occur to him to question DI Smith about
what he was doing in this investigation. It certainly did not occur to him to ask whether
DI Smith had checked to see if Shipman had any criminal convictions. He gained the
impression that matters were being dealt with properly but that nothing had emerged from
the investigation such as to give rise to any concern.
The Lost Chance for an Autopsy
8.12 I noted earlier that, on 30th March, Dr Reynolds telephoned Dr Gough to give a report on
progress. Dr Gough recorded that Dr Reynolds thought that an autopsy was to take place
67
SHIP02$$14 09-04-03 21:09:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P008 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
on one of the bodies she had identified to the investigating police officer. Mrs Lily Higgins
had been cremated on Wednesday, 25th March and Miss Ada Warburton was cremated
on 30th March. The opportunities for autopsy had gone. The body of Mrs Martha Marley
was cremated on 31st March. Her body had also been available for examination but
DI Smith had never become aware of her death.
8.13 In short, no progress had been made in the investigation between 27th and 31st March.
68
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER NINE
Dr Banks Advises Detective Inspector Smith
Detective Inspector Smith Meets Dr Banks
9.1 In the morning of Wednesday, 1st April 1998, Detective Inspector Smith attended
Selbourne House to meet Dr Banks. This was the first time that the two had spoken to each
other. It was Dr Banks’ recollection that DI Smith was accompanied by another police
officer. DI Smith said that he was alone. Mrs Parkinson, who also attended the meeting,
could not remember whether or not a second police officer was present. Dr Banks
described the ‘other officer’ as older than DI Smith but apparently junior to him in rank,
probably a detective sergeant or detective constable. GMP has made extensive efforts to
identify an officer who might have been with DI Smith on this occasion but without success.
There is some evidence that DI Smith was accompanied by another officer when he visited
the crematorium later that day. If he was, that might suggest that he was also
accompanied during the morning. I regret to say that I am unable to reach any conclusion
as to whether or not DI Smith attended this meeting alone or in the company of another
officer.
9.2 Mrs Parkinson did not take a note of the meeting. That is a pity, as her earlier note was
valuable. She said that she did not take a note as she was attending only as an observer
and did not have to take any action arising from the meeting. The Inquiry is therefore wholly
reliant on the recollections of those present as to what was said. Those recollections differ
considerably.
Detective Inspector Smith’s Account
9.3 DI Smith said that he met Dr Banks in a small room downstairs. Dr Banks had the medical
records with him. He said that he had gone through them and could not see anything odd
or of a criminal nature. He had recorded some information on a chart, which DI Smith saw
at the time; the chart is at Appendix D of this Report. DI Smith said that Dr Banks did not
go through the individual deaths in detail; he just drew attention to one or two cases in
which, he said, there was a lack of information in the records. Dr Banks pointed out that
some of the computerised records appeared to have been made on a system that
provided very limited character space within the relevant fields. There were one or two
cases in which, according to Dr Banks, the cause of death was not sufficiently specific.
DI Smith could not recall which cases these were but said that Dr Banks had said that, in
these cases, there was insufficient information for a doctor to diagnose the cause of death.
Dr Banks personally would have referred those deaths to the coroner. However, this
information did not ring any alarm bells with DI Smith. He said that it had never occurred
to him that, if Shipman had killed a patient, he might want to avoid referring the death to
the coroner. I find it disturbing that an experienced detective could have failed to grasp
the simple concept that a doctor who had murdered a patient might wish to avoid an
autopsy of the victim’s body.
9.4 DI Smith recalled that Dr Banks told him that Shipman was an old-fashioned doctor who
often visited his patients at home and liked to keep his elderly patients at home rather than
69
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
send them into hospital. DI Smith said that Dr Banks told him that there was nothing in the
notes to suggest criminality. He said that he felt reassured by Dr Banks’ opinion. He did
not discuss with Dr Banks the possibility that Shipman might be killing his patients by
giving them a drug of some sort, as suggested by Dr Reynolds. Nor did he ask Dr Banks
how a doctor might kill his patients. He did not appear to have realised that a discussion
of how a doctor might kill a patient might have affected Dr Banks’ approach to the medical
records.
Dr Banks’ Account
9.5 Dr Banks said that the meeting took place in the boardroom. He began by showing
DI Smith the typical contents of a set of records and explaining what information was kept
in them. He said that he handed DI Smith a copy of his chart (which he recalled DI Smith
took away with him after the meeting) and showed him from where, in the records, the
information had come. He said that, in allowing DI Smith to see confidential information
taken from the medical records, he was exercising his discretion under the Health
Authority’s ‘Access to Medical Records Procedures’ to allow limited disclosure of medical
information in the public interest. He said that he went through the chart, case by case.
He told DI Smith that, in some cases, there was insufficient information to allow a reliable
diagnosis of the cause of death and he expressed the view that the computerised notes
might be incomplete. Dr Banks said that he told DI Smith that there were some cases that
he felt should have been referred to the coroner. As I have already mentioned, Dr Banks
told the Inquiry that he was sure he had mentioned to DI Smith the cases of
Miss Mabel Shawcross, Mrs Cissie Davies and Mrs Winifred Healey.
9.6 Dr Banks could not remember whether there was any discussion of the common features
of the deaths. He said that DI Smith did not ask whether there were any signs of criminality
and he (Dr Banks) did not volunteer the opinion that there were none. That would not have
been his function or within his expertise. He could not understand how DI Smith could
claim to have been reassured by what he said.
9.7 Dr Banks said that DI Smith was very friendly and relaxed. He had the impression that
DI Smith was taking his investigation seriously but was not making any progress. There
was no sense of urgency at this meeting, although he had received an impression of
urgency when told earlier about the request for access to the records. Dr Banks said that
there was no discussion about death rates at the meeting. He had seen Mrs Parkinson’s
note and knew that DI Smith had told her that there had been 16 cremations of Shipman’s
patients in three months. However, it appears to be common ground that Dr Banks was
not told about the comparison between the death rate in Shipman’s practice and that of
the Brooke Practice. This is consistent with my view that DI Smith did not regard the
comparative death rates as important. Dr Banks agreed that DI Smith did not tell him that
it had been suggested that Shipman might be killing his patients by giving them a drug.
Dr Banks recalled DI Smith using expressions such as ‘gossip between GPs and
undertakers’ and ‘rumour and innuendo’.
9.8 Dr Banks had the impression that he was the last important source of information available
to DI Smith. He said that he thought other sources were open to DI Smith, if he felt it
70
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
appropriate to pursue them, but he had the impression that DI Smith felt that they would
lead nowhere. He also felt that DI Smith was satisfied with the information he was giving
him. Dr Banks did not think that he told DI Smith that Shipman was an old-fashioned doctor
(because he did not think he was), although he might have said that Shipman had a
reputation for visiting his patients unannounced.
9.9 In 1999, Dr Banks provided a written statement for his employers, setting out details of his
involvement in the March 1998 police investigation. The statement is undated. Dr Banks’
line manager, Mrs Forster, believes that the statement was prepared as a result of a
request from her in July 1999. However, Dr Banks believes that he wrote it earlier, probably
in April. In the statement, Dr Banks said:
‘I later met with Detective Inspector D Smith and a colleague where we
reviewed each set of records and my findings. It was my view that there
were few common features in each of these deaths. I expressed concern
that in a number of cases there was insufficient evidence in the records
on which to base a cause of death and that I personally would have
arranged a post-mortem [sic]. Most causes of death given by HFS were
consistent with the medicalrecord.
At no time did I consider that HFS had done anything criminal.’
Mrs Parkinson’s Account
9.10 Mrs Parkinson’s recollection of this meeting was very sketchy. She recalled that Dr Banks
had his chart with him but she had no recollection of the chart being handed to DI Smith
or of hearing any case-by-case discussion. She had no recollection of Dr Banks
expressing any concern about the records. She only recalled him saying that there were
two cases where insufficient history was recorded but she did not recall him saying which
they were. She could not recall him saying that there ought to have been an autopsy in
some cases. She could not recall any discussion about the common features. Nor did she
remember Dr Banks saying that the computerised records might be incomplete and there
might be more information on the computer. She did not recall any discussion about the
suddenness of the deaths; she thinks that she would have remembered that.
Were Other Topics Discussed?
9.11 Mrs Parkinson said that she was asked to obtain some information from the information
department at the Health Authority’s office at Lindley House, Oldham. She cannot
remember how this came about but it would seem that there must have been some
discussion about the size or make-up of Shipman’s patient list. At 10.51am on 1st April,
some extracts from Shipman’s Practice Profile for the year ending March 1996 were faxed
to Selbourne House. The Practice Profile is a document produced annually by the Health
Authority for each general practice in its area and is designed to show the performance
of each practice in such fields as prescribing, financial expenditure and hospital activity
when compared with the average practice in Tameside. Mrs Parkinson believed that 1996
was the last year for which the figures were readily available at Lindley House, which, prior
71
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
to the creation of the WPHA, had been the office of the Family Health Services Authority.
It did not matter that the information contained in the Profile was more than two years old,
as, in fact, the more recent figures were very similar.
9.12 Neither DI Smith nor Dr Banks can remember this document being called for or received
and neither has any recollection of any discussion about its contents. It would seem
therefore that this material was not carefully examined. That is unfortunate, as it contained
information which, although slightly stale, would have illuminated any discussion of the
death rate among Shipman’s patients, had one taken place. First, it established the size
of Shipman’s patient list. That would have clarified the significance of the comparative
death rates provided by Dr Reynolds. Second, it showed that, in 1996, Shipman had 169
(or 5.49%) patients over the age of 75 years; in 1995, 6.7% of the population was over 75,
so the proportion of patients over the age of 75 within Shipman’s practice was not above
average. That would have scotched any notion that Shipman had an unusually large
number of elderly patients and could therefore be expected to have a higher than normal
death rate among his patients. There was also further information that would have
undermined any suggestion that Shipman had an unusually large number of elderly
female patients, such as might account for the deaths of so many elderly women. The
Practice Profile showed the age/sex distribution of Shipman’s list, compared with the
average Tameside practice list. The average Tameside practice list had just over 6000
patients, which was about twice the size of Shipman’s list. Shipman had about half as
many male patients over 75 as the average practice; in other words, the proportion of
males over 75 in his list was the same as that of the average practice in Tameside. More
significantly, he had about two-fifths of the average number of female patients over 75.
This confirmed that, far from having a lot of elderly female patients, Shipman actually had
a smaller proportion of such patients than the average practice.
9.13 I have come to the conclusion that this data was not examined at all during the meeting.
I think that Dr Banks must have asked Mrs Parkinson to obtain some practice population
information and that the two men continued their discussion in her absence. I think that,
by the time the extracts from the Practice Profile had arrived, the discussion of the
individual cases was over; Dr Banks had said that he had found nothing of concern (save
for the ‘couple of’ or ‘few’ cases where there was insufficient information to diagnose the
cause of death) and DI Smith was quite satisfied with the outcome. Neither man then saw
any need to examine or discuss the figures. This accords with Mrs Parkinson’s recollection
of some discussion about the practice population, after which she telephoned the Oldham
office. She does not recall any subsequent discussion.
The ‘Bad Joke’
9.14 Dr Banks said that, shortly before the end of the meeting, DI Smith said something like ‘We
will just have to see if he [Shipman] does it again’. This must have occurred at the time
when it had become apparent that perusal of the medical records had yielded nothing of
significance to the investigation. Dr Banks thought this was a failed attempt at ‘black
humour’. Mrs Parkinson also remembers this remark and thought it was in very bad taste.
She thought DI Smith had immediately regretted making it. DI Smith does not think he said
it. I am satisfied that he did and that it was an attempt at humour. Dr Banks said that he
72
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
did not think this indicated that DI Smith had serious concerns that Shipman might be
killing his patients. I accept that this is so; indeed I think that, by this time, DI Smith was
firmly of the view that there was no foundation for Dr Reynolds’ concerns. But the fact that
Dr Banks understood the ‘joke’ means he must have realised that the nature of the
concerns underlying the investigation was that someone thought Shipman might be killing
his patients.
Findings
9.15 It is clear that there was no preliminary discussion between DI Smith and Dr Banks which
might have ensured that Dr Banks was fully informed about the nature of the concerns
expressed and knew exactly what information DI Smith was looking for in the records.
DI Smith did not seek a preliminary discussion because, in my view, he did not have a very
clear idea of what he was looking for. He did not know what kind of information was likely
to be recorded in the notes. His mind was focussed mainly on discovering whether the
records revealed a pattern of common features. I think he believed that, unless all the
deaths showed a clear pattern of the features described by the undertaker, there was no
evidence within them to support Dr Reynolds’ concerns. Probably, he had conveyed that
view to Mrs Parkinson, who had passed it on to Dr Banks. I do not think that, at the time of
making his request, DI Smith had realised that it might be possible to form a view about
whether the cause of death certified was consistent with the medical history revealed by
the records. It may well be that he realised that during his meeting with Dr Banks. He was
certainly aware of it when he wrote his first report of his investigation on 17th August 1998.
9.16 In my view, Dr Banks did not clarify his instructions from DI Smith because he believed that
he knew what he was looking for, namely a clear pattern of similar features present in all
the deaths. I accept, however, that he also had in mind the question of consistency
between the medical history and the cause of death, as revealed in the records.
9.17 I find that Dr Banks began the meeting by explaining the nature of the medical records
and the type of material they contained. I think he probably explained the importance of
confidentiality and the reasons why he could not release the records to the police. I think
it likely that, although Dr Banks was concerned about the confidentiality of the material
within the chart, he allowed DI Smith to look at it while he was explaining his findings.
However, I do not think that the question ever arose of DI Smith taking the chart away.
9.18 There is a conflict as to whether Dr Banks went through the chart case by case, as he said,
or whether he discussed the cases only in a general way, as DI Smith claimed. I find that
there was some discussion of the individual cases. I say that mainly because it is clear
that DI Smith was able to remember some details of one case when he spoke to Detective
Superintendent Ellis in April 2000, which he could not have known from anywhere else.
However, I do not think the cases were discussed in depth. Nor do I think that there was
any discussion about the presence of common features; rather the emphasis must have
been on the absence of common features. I find that the gist of Dr Banks’ opinion was very
much what he had said to Mrs Parkinson on 27th March, which she had recorded in her
note. This was that there was no clear pattern of features to be seen within the records.
I am satisfied that Dr Banks did not draw attention to the fact that his chart revealed
73
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
that all but one of the deceased were female, that all but two (Mrs Norah Nuttall and
Mrs Bianka Pomfret) were over 65 and that all but one had, on the face of the records, died
at home. In fact two had died in institutions. I am sure that he did not draw attention to the
fact that, according to the chart, Shipman appeared to have been present at or about the
time of the death in no fewer than ten of the 14 cases. These were features that bore some
relation to Dr Reynolds’ concerns and, had they been mentioned, might have raised
DI Smith’s level of concern.
9.19 I am satisfied that Dr Banks told DI Smith that there were two or ‘a few’ deaths in which he
considered that there was insufficient information in the records to enable a proper
diagnosis of the cause of death to be made. He also said that he would have referred those
deaths to the coroner. I do not think he said that any reasonable doctor would have
referred those cases or implied that there was anything suspicious about Shipman’s
failure to do so. I accept that he mentioned that many of the records were computerised
and that the available fields were limited. I think this was probably said in the context of
providing an explanation as to why there was such limited information in the records. The
implication was that more might be available if access were gained to the computer and
that there might then be enough information to diagnose death. In other words, there was
a potentially innocent explanation for the shortage of information in the two or ‘few’ cases.
9.20 I accept that there was some general discussion about Shipman and his reputation. I think
it likely that Dr Banks revealed that he knew Shipman and respected him. I do not think it
occurred to either man that Dr Banks’ knowledge of and respect for Shipman rendered him
unsuitable as an examiner of Shipman’s records. Dr Banks found it virtually unthinkable that
any doctor would deliberately harm his patients. It would be even more difficult for him to
open his mind to that possibility in relation to a doctor whom he knew and respected.
9.21 I am satisfied that the overall impression created by Dr Banks must have been one of
reassurance. Had it not been, Mrs Parkinson would have been quick to pick up any hint
that her mother might be in danger from Shipman.
9.22 At the meeting, there was no discussion of the death rate among Shipman’s patients as
compared with those at the Brooke Practice. I think there must have been some brief
discussion of numbers, which led to the request for the practice population information. I
do not think that there was any discussion of that topic after the information had been
obtained. There should have been discussion of the numbers recorded by Mrs Parkinson,
which came from Dr Reynolds, and also about the comparative death rates in the two
practices. DI Smith did not tell Dr Banks about the comparative figures because he did
not understand them or their importance. Dr Banks did not pursue any question of the
death rates because, rather surprisingly for a doctor in his position, he did not know the
annual crude death rate for patients in UK general practice and the number of deaths
recorded by Mrs Parkinson did not strike him as particularly high. I think it likely that
Dr Banks said as much to DI Smith and further reduced his already low level of concern
about the death rate. As I am satisfied that Dr Banks knew the nature of the concerns under
investigation, I consider that he should have made it his business to find out the average
death rate. This could easily have been discovered from Dr Friedman, the Director of
Public Health Medicine, who would have realised immediately that the figures for
Shipman’s cremations mentioned by Dr Reynolds appeared unusually high.
74
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
9.23 I am also satisfied that Dr Banks did not explain to DI Smith that it was most unusual for
one general practitioner to make any complaint about the conduct of another, let alone a
complaint of so serious a nature as this one. Dr Friedman told the Inquiry that such
concerns or complaints are very rare and I did not understand Dr Banks to disagree. I think
that Dr Banks dismissed this expression of concern, made by one doctor about another,
as malicious without any real basis for that belief.
The Adequacy of Dr Banks’ Review of the MedicalRecords
9.24 In Chapter Fifteen, I shall consider in some detail the adequacy of Dr Banks’ review of the
medical records and the advice that he gave to DI Smith. At this stage, it must suffice to
say that I shall conclude that he failed to notice or to advise DI Smith that there were at
least four cases out of the 14 in which the circumstances revealed by the records made
it mandatory that the deaths be reported to the coroner. I shall find also that there were at
least five other cases where it was not clear whether a duty to report to the coroner arose.
Those five, taken in conjunction with the four cases where a report was mandatory, should
have raised Dr Banks’ level of concern about Shipman’s reporting practices. Further,
Dr Banks should have noticed, but apparently did not, that certain of the features which
had given rise to Dr Reynolds’ concerns were present in some of the cases. I have
concluded that Dr Banks’ review of the records was defective because his mind was not
open to the possibility that Shipman might be harming his patients. His approach was to
seek for and find an innocent explanation for everything he saw.
The Outcome of the Meeting
9.25 As a result of what Dr Banks had told him, DI Smith left the meeting believing that there
was nothing in the medical records that in any way substantiated Dr Reynolds’ concerns.
Dr Banks had given the impression that the records contained nothing to suggest an
abnormal pattern of deaths. However, DI Smith was not entitled to deduce that Dr Banks’
opinion amounted to positive evidence that Dr Reynolds’ concerns were unfounded. All
Dr Banks was able to say was that there was no evidence in the records to support
suspicion, which is very different from saying that there was positive evidence that all was
well. A moment’s thought would suggest that, if Shipman were killing his patients, one
would not expect there to be overt evidence of it within the medical records, which, of
course, he compiled and kept. One would expect any misconduct to be concealed.
9.26 DI Smith appears to have placed a great deal of reliance on Dr Banks’ opinion of the
records. Chief Superintendent Sykes said that he had the impression that, when DI Smith
had received a negative response from Dr Banks, he had virtually reached the end of the
investigation. Indeed, DI Smith said so himself in his first Inquiry statement, although in oral
evidence he denied that it was the case.
9.27 I am satisfied that, to all intents and purposes, the receipt of Dr Banks’ opinion on 1st April
marked the end of this investigation. By that time, DI Smith was convinced that there was
nothing in Dr Reynolds’ concerns. However, he still had it in mind to visit the crematorium,
to find out what proportion of Shipman’s deceased patients had been cremated, and to
75
SHIP02$$15 14-04-03 10:30:27 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P009 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
identify the still unknown female undertaker. I am satisfied that he did not expect those
enquiries to yield any evidence to support Dr Reynolds’ concerns.
Later Developments
9.28 As a postscripttothis aspect ofthe evidence, it appearsthat, at sometime after thismeeting
had taken place, Dr Banks received the medical records of Mr Harold Eddleston, a patient
of Shipman, who had died on 4th March 1998. Dr Banks reviewed them (he says in much the
same way as he had reviewed the others) and prepared a memorandum of his findings,
dated 6thApril. The circumstances ofMr Eddleston’s death areto befound in Volume Four of
my First Report. I found that Shipman killed Mr Eddleston only a few days after he had been
accepted onto Shipman’s patient list. Dr Banks was of the view that it was unusual for a
patient to change his general practitioner so soon before his death, as Mr Eddleston had
done. Dr Banks was also rather confused by the entry for the day of the death. He noted that
it appeared that Shipman had seen the patient at some time and that the body was found in
the afternoon by Mr Eddleston’s grandson. Mr Eddleston’s daughter had seen him alive at
12.30pm and Shipman had certified the cause of death at 3.40pm.
9.29 It appears that Dr Banks was prepared to have the information contained in the
memorandum imparted to DI Smith. It is not clear when Mrs Parkinson first tried to contact
DI Smith to pass it on. Certainly, she had not succeeded in speaking to him at the time
when the investigation was closed on 17th April. She made a note that she had telephoned
him on 20th April: see Appendix C. At that time, DI Smith was on leave. He returned to duty
on 2nd May but did not contact her. She tried again on 15th May, and left a message asking
him to telephone her. DI Smith finally telephoned her on 21st May and told her that he had
spoken to the Coroner and that the matter was not going to be pursued further.
Mrs Parkinson told Dr Banks and made a note to the effect that Dr Banks was ‘happy for
matter to be closed’.
9.30 Dr Banks told the Inquiry that he was left with general, non-specific concerns about
Shipman’s practice. He said that he decided that he would take the opportunity to discuss
these concerns with Shipman on 27th July 1998, when he was to carry out a routine
prescribing visit. He said that, on that occasion, Shipman himself raised the topic and told
him that he had noticed an excess of deaths in the practice during the first quarter of 1998.
Shipman said that, with the assistance of his practice nurse, Sister Gillian Morgan, he had
undertaken an audit of the deaths and was satisfied that all appropriate care had been
given. The Inquiry has been unable to discover any evidence that such an audit was
carried out and Sister Morgan and other members of the practice staff have denied all
knowledge of it. Dr Banks said that he advised Shipman that the Health Authority had
become aware of these deaths and that he personally had reviewed some of the records.
He advised Shipman that he should send more deaths for autopsy as, where numbers of
deaths seemed excessive, it was wise to obtain confirmation of the cause of death.
Dr Banks said that Shipman did not seem surprised to hear that he had examined the
records; he was pleasant and was more amenable than usual to suggestions for changes
in his prescribing practice.
9.31 It appears to me that Shipman had become aware that the excess deaths in his practice
had been noticed and was anxious to allay any concerns that might persist.
76
SHIP02$$16 09-04-03 21:12:15 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER TEN
Detective Inspector Smith’s Visit to the Crematorium
The Purpose of the Visit
10.1 On his return from Selbourne House on 1st April 1998, Detective Inspector Smith
telephoned Dukinfield crematorium and arranged to visit, probably that afternoon. He told
the Inquiry that his purpose in so doing was to find out whether the proportion of
cremations to burials among Shipman’s patients was normal. He also wished to identify
the female undertaker of whom Dr Reynolds had spoken.
10.2 DI Smith’s interest in the proportion of cremations to burials was based on a
misunderstanding of Dr Reynolds’ concerns. He had somehow gained the impression that
it was a cause of concern that a greater proportion of Shipman’s patients was being
cremated than was normal and that Shipman might, in some way, be influencing the
choice of the method of disposal of the bodies of his victims in order to destroy evidence
of wrongdoing. He said that he was puzzled by this supposed concern, as he could not
understand how a doctor would be able to influence the relatives in favour of cremation
rather than burial. He accepted that Dr Reynolds could not have told him of concerns
about an abnormal proportion of cremations, as she would not have known how many of
Shipman’s patients had been buried; she only knew that there were a lot of cremations. It
is theoretically possible that Dr Reynolds told DI Smith that Mrs Bambroffe was concerned
about the proportion of cremations among Shipman’s patients. However, there is no
evidence that she did and no evidence that this had ever been one of Mrs Bambroffe’s
concerns. Although he was puzzled by the nature of this supposed concern, DI Smith did
not speak to anyone in an attempt to clarify his confusion. It seems likely that Dr Reynolds
told him she was concerned about the number of cremations and DI Smith assumed that
she meant cremations, as opposed to burials, not appreciating that the Brooke Practice
doctors were only involved in the cremations and not the burials.
The Visit
10.3 On his arrival at the crematorium, DI Smith met the Senior Registrar, Mr Michael Gurney.
Mr Gurney said that DI Smith was accompanied by another police officer. DI Smith said
he was alone. I am unable to say who is right.
10.4 DI Smith said that he did not tell Mr Gurney the precise nature of his enquiries; he did not
mention that they were connected with Shipman, although he made it clear that he was
engaged in a confidential investigation. He believed that he might have told Mr Gurney
that the Coroner was involved. He had with him his bundle of copy death certificates from
the register office. He did not take his spreadsheet with him. He wanted to find out which
of the deceased of whom he knew appeared in the cremation register. Those who did not
appear must have been buried. Mr Gurney told him that, in general, about 70% of deaths
were followed by cremation. DI Smith also wanted to find out the name of the funeral
director in each case.
10.5 DI Smith did not ask Mr Gurney to explain what records he held or what information they
contained. Had he done so, he would have learned that, apart from the cremation register,
77
SHIP02$$16 09-04-03 21:12:15 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
the crematorium retained the bundle of certificates relating to each individual cremation.
These contained useful information about the circumstances of the death. Nor did
DI Smith ask whether there were any limitations on what he would be allowed to see. Had
he done so, he would have been told that, as a senior police officer, he would be given
access to the register and the individual bundles.
10.6 Details of all cremations are recorded in the register, which is a very large book in which
the columns of information are spread across double pages. On the left, the register
records a cremation number, the date of cremation, the name, residence and occupation
of the deceased, the age and sex and marital status of the deceased and the date of
death. On the right, the columns provide for the name and address of the person who
applied for the cremation, the names and addresses of the doctors who signed Forms B
and C (or the identity of the coroner who permitted disposal of the body), the district where
the death was registered, the signature of the minister who officiated at the service and
the method of disposal of the ashes. The register does not (or did not in 1998) include the
name of the funeral director.
10.7 In evidence, DI Smith and Mr Gurney disagreed as to how information was extracted from
the register for DI Smith. Mr Gurney said that he gave the register to DI Smith and his
colleague and left them to take such information as they wanted. DI Smith said that he did
not look at the register, but sat opposite Mr Gurney, who had the register before him. He
called out the names from his bundle of copy death certificates and Mr Gurney looked in
the register and gave him the information. DI Smith entered the information in his daybook.
The list of names can be seen at Appendix A. The list comprises 20 names and includes
that of Miss Ada Warburton. Seventeen of the 20 deaths were followed by cremation. It is
clear that Mr Gurney found and provided information about the three deaths on the list
where the bodies were buried. Mr Gurney was also the Senior Registrar in charge of the
eight cemeteries in the area and the interment forms were kept at the Dukinfield
crematorium.
10.8 The names of the funeral directors who dealt with the 20 deaths are also included on
DI Smith’s list. These could not have been found in the register. To find them, someone
must have recovered the relevant bundles of cremation certificates, filed in another part
of the building. Neither man could recall how or by whom this was done. However, this
operation must have taken an appreciable length of time.
A Lost Opportunity
10.9 On examining the cremation register, it became clear that, if DI Smith had looked at the
register himself, he should have noticed that there were more deaths among Shipman’s
patients than he had been made aware of. That was because some of the entries relating
to the deceased about whom DI Smith knew were adjacent to other entries which also
contained Shipman’s name as the Form B doctor. If DI Smith had noticed these other
entries, he might then have realised that the information he had been given by the register
office was incomplete. On the other hand, if Mr Gurney were looking at the register, he
would not be looking out for other Shipman deaths, as he did not know that the enquiries
related to the deaths of Shipman’s patients. If it were the case that DI Smith was
78
SHIP02$$16 09-04-03 21:12:15 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
accompanied by a junior officer, as recalled by Mr Gurney, it is possible that that officer
looked at the register and either did not realise that he should look for other entries relating
to Shipman or did realise that but failed to see any.
10.10 I am not sure who examined the register but I think that DI Smith’s recollection is more likely
to be accurate. Mr Gurney is plainly a completely honest witness. However, he was
present on other occasions later in the year when the police examined the cremation
registers. There is a real possibility that he has confused the occasions. DI Smith, on the
other hand, only went to the crematorium once. I accept therefore that DI Smith probably
did not look at the register himself, although I think he should have done. I think it likely
that he told Mr Gurney the names of the deceased and Mr Gurney provided the limited
information requested. Mr Gurney never realised that DI Smith was interested in all deaths
of Shipman’s patients where Shipman was the certifying (Form B) doctor. That is not a
criticism. Mr Gurney was complying with a specific request for information and it was not
for him to think about what other information he might be able to supply, unless requested
to do so.
10.11 Unfortunately, DI Smith was thinking only about obtaining the limited information he had
set out to find. He believed that his bundle of copy death certificates was complete even
though, if it were, it would follow that Dr Reynolds’ figures were almost certainly wrong.
Had his mind been open to the possibility that he might learn more about the deaths of
Shipman’s patients than whether they were buried or cremated, he could have compiled
a list of all the cremations within a six-month period for which Shipman had completed
Form B. Had he done that (with or without Mr Gurney’s help), he would have found details
of all the deaths previously missed at the register office since, as it happened, every one
of the patients of whose deaths he was unaware had been cremated. In the event,
because DI Smith did not ask for a general trawl of the register for deaths in which Shipman
had signed Form B (or examine the register himself), another opportunity to discover the
error made by the register office was lost.
10.12 If DI Smith had asked, he would have been shown the bundle of certificates for each
cremation. These would have included the Forms B, completed by Shipman, which
contained a great deal of information about the deaths. Examination of the cremation
forms relating to the deaths of which DI Smith was by this time aware would have revealed
that Shipman had, on his own account, been present at one death and had visited seven
of the patients within a period of four hours or less before the death occurred. DI Smith
would have seen that seven of the patients were said to have died alone. This information
would have provided some evidence of an unusual pattern among the deaths. Because
DI Smith never found out how the cremation certification system worked (by asking
Dr Reynolds or Mr Gurney or both), he did not realise what he was missing. The
crematorium was a valuable source of information about the individual deaths under
investigation. The opportunity to tap that source was missed.
10.13 Another consequence of DI Smith’s failure to ask about the system of cremation
certification was that he failed to discover the existence of the medical referee. Had he
been asked how the system worked, Mr Gurney would have explained that, before a
cremation is authorised, the forms supporting the application for cremation must be
79
SHIP02$$16 09-04-03 21:12:15 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
examined by the medical referee, a doctor employed at the crematorium. The law requires
that the medical referee should consider whether the fact and cause of death have been
definitely ascertained and whether the death might be due to a non-natural cause, such
as violence. A medical referee has power to require an autopsy, to decline to allow a
cremation without an inquest and even to decline to allow a cremation without stating any
reasons. By failing to ask about the system, DI Smith lost the opportunity to interview the
Medical Referee at the Dukinfield crematorium, Dr Betty Hinchliffe, or her deputy. An
interview with Dr Hinchliffe would not have breached the requirement of confidentiality. As
it happens, had DI Smith spoken to Dr Hinchliffe, he would have received an assurance
that Shipman always completed his Forms B satisfactorily and that his deaths gave rise to
no ground for suspicion. Only if the records held by the crematorium had been analysed
would it have been found that, for several years, Shipman had consistently completed
more Forms B than any other general practitioner in the area. The unusual features of many
of the deaths would also have been noticed; for example, that Shipman was often present
when the death occurred or had been present very shortly before it was discovered.
The Results of the Visit
10.14 It will be seen from the list in DI Smith’s daybook that the firm of Masseys had arranged
the funerals for no fewer than nine of the 20 deceased persons on the list. Below the list,
DI Smith has written the name ‘Debbie Massey’. At this time, although Mrs Bambroffe was
married, many people still called her by her maiden name. DI Smith said that, having
noticed how frequently the name ‘Masseys’ recurred in the list which he had compiled, he
concluded that Mrs Bambroffe must be the female undertaker who had expressed
concern about the deaths of Shipman’s patients. In that he was right. However, he made
no attempt to contact Mrs Bambroffe until two weeks later, on 15th April.
10.15 In Chapter Three, I drew attention to the list of four funeral directors and their telephone
numbers which DI Smith had, at some stage, written on the left-hand page of his daybook,
opposite the information recorded during his meeting with the Coroner. It is not absolutely
clear when that information was recorded, although, as I observed in Chapter Three, the
circumstances suggest that DI Smith obtained it before his visit to the crematorium.
Bearing in mind the mistake in the name of Robinson and Jordan, which appears to have
originated from the Brooke Practice record, it seems to me that it is more likely that DI Smith
obtained this information at or shortly after leaving the Brooke Practice Surgery than from
the crematorium. It seems likely that DI Smith took down the names of four funeral directors
while speaking to Dr Reynolds and, at some time later, copied the four names onto the
opposite page and added the telephone numbers. Whenever he obtained them, it
appears that the only one he used was that of Masseys.
10.16 DI Smith had found that the deaths of 85% of Shipman’s patients had been followed by
cremation and only 15% by burial. This was higher than the 70% average suggested by
Mr Gurney. However, he did not regard that as a suspicious factor and no one has
suggested that it was. It may be that the fact that not every one of Shipman’s patients had
been cremated added to DI Smith’s feeling that there was nothing amiss. The fact is that
the exercise was misconceived, as the proportion of cremations had never been a cause
for concern.
80
SHIP02$$16 09-04-03 21:12:15 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
10.17 As I have said, this visit was a missed opportunity to find out a great deal of information
about the deaths of Shipman’s patients.
Postscript
10.18 After his visit to the crematorium, DI Smith entered the information he had acquired there
on his computer spreadsheet: see Appendix B. The spreadsheet records 19 deaths, the
last of which is that of Mrs Lily Higgins. The name, address, cause of death, age, dates of
birth and death and gender of the deceased noted on the spreadsheet would all have
been ascertainable from the copy death certificates; the information about funeral
directors and whether the deceased was buried or cremated came from the crematorium.
The column headed ‘Found By’ has not been completed. As I have noted, the
spreadsheet does not include any information about Miss Ada Warburton, although her
name does appear on the list compiled by DI Smith at the crematorium. It appears to me
that DI Smith began work on the spreadsheet before his visit to the crematorium and that
the information about the funeral directors and the method of disposal was added
afterwards. As I have already observed, it does not appear that DI Smith added any
information obtained from Dr Banks. All the other versions of the spreadsheet contain
columns and information added during the second police investigation which began in
July 1998.
81
SHIP02P010 09-04-03 21:12:15 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P010 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 3
SHIP02$$17 09-04-03 21:13:14 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Detective Inspector Smith’s Knowledge ofthe Death of
Miss Ada Warburton
The Question to be Determined
11.1 In Chapters Three and Five, I referred to the issue of when Detective Inspector Smith first
found out about the death of Miss Ada Warburton. It will be recalled that DI Smith had
denied the suggestion, put to him by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry, that Dr Reynolds told
him about that death during their meeting on 24th March 1998, in the context of a
discussion about bodies that were available for autopsy.
11.2 Until shortly before he gave oral evidence to the Inquiry, DI Smith had always said that he
had received from the register office a totalof 19 copy death certificates on two separate
occasions; that number would not include the certificate relating to Miss Warburton.
Miss Warburton’s name appeared twice in DI Smith’s daybook: see Appendix A. It first
appears on the page on which he set out the information which he had gathered in the
early stages of his investigation. It then appears in the list of names compiled by DI Smith
at the Dukinfield crematorium. The question therefore arose as to the source from which
DI Smith had obtained Miss Warburton’s name.
11.3 DI Smith offered no answer to this question untilshortly before he gave evidence. In a
statement signed on 27th May 2002, the day on which he began his oralevidence, he
alleged that he had learned of Miss Warburton’s death by receiving her copy death
certificate from Mr Loader on the morning of 26th March 1998. He then said, for the first
time, that he recalled receiving 20 copy death certificates (including hers) on that one
occasion. DI Smith’s explanation for his recent change of evidence was that the hearing
of evidence given at the Inquiry had jogged his memory. He had recently been able to
think afresh about past events and this had resulted in a genuine change of recollection.
The Evidence
11.4 I have already said in Chapter Three that the evidence suggesting that DI Smith learned
of Miss Warburton’s death from Dr Reynolds is strong. Miss Warburton’s name appears
on the page of his daybook that contains information he acquired in the early stages of his
investigation. Also, it appears that, on 30th March, Dr Reynolds told Dr Gough of the MDU
that it was intended to proceed with an autopsy on the body of the patient she had
identified. Dr Reynolds must have gathered that impression from somewhere and I
concluded that she had probably gathered it from DI Smith. This suggests that there must
have been a discussion about bodies (or at least one body) available for autopsy. In
addition, Miss Warburton’s name and details appear on the note written by Dr Reynolds,
which I have previously referred to and which I believe she had with her when she saw
DI Smith. It is likely that she would have mentioned to him the information contained in
the note.
11.5 I have mentioned that, shortly after he received the bundle of copy death certificates from
Mr Loader, DI Smith created a spreadsheet containing the names of the deceased
83
SHIP02$$17 09-04-03 21:13:14 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
patients of which he was aware. The first available version of that spreadsheet (and the
only one which came into existence during the first police investigation) is at Appendix B.
Miss Warburton’s name is not included. The list of names, which is in chronological order
by date of death, ends with Mrs Lily Higgins, who died before Miss Warburton. DI Smith
could not explain why, if he had received her copy death certificate from Mr Loader, he
did not insert Miss Warburton’s name in the chart with all the others.
11.6 Miss Warburton’s name did not appear on the list of names that DI Smith gave to
Mrs Parkinson on 26th March. Since the list was compiled by reference to the copy death
certificates which he had in his possession on that day, the most likely explanation for the
omission is that he did not have Miss Warburton’s certificate, because Mr Loader had not
provided it. DI Smith has recently suggested that Miss Warburton’s name was omitted
from Mrs Parkinson’s list because it was decided between him, Mrs Parkinson and
Dr Bradshaw that there was no point in including Miss Warburton’s name; she had died
so recently that her medical records would not be available for some time. I reject that
explanation for several reasons. First, Mrs Parkinson said that she could not recall any
such conversation. Second, the explanation makes no sense, as the name of Mrs Higgins,
who died only three days before Miss Warburton, was included on the list. In any event,
there is no reason to suppose that medicalrecords came back to the Health Authority in
strictly chronological order of death and Mrs Parkinson told the Inquiry that she was not
herself familiar with the procedures for the return of medical records. Thus, it is unlikely
that she would have proffered any view about the probable length of any delay in obtaining
the records. Finally, DI Smith could not possibly have known, on 26th March, how long his
investigation was likely to last; a decision to put Miss Warburton’s name on the list, with a
view to her records being obtained when available, would have made sense; a decision
not to put her name on the list would not. In my view, it is far more likely that, on 26th March,
DI Smith did not have Miss Warburton’s copy death certificate and had forgotten that he
had been told about her death on the previous day and had noted it in his daybook.
11.7 So far, all the evidence suggests that DI Smith did not learn of Miss Warburton’s death by
receiving the copy death certificate from Mr Loader. What about the possibility that he first
learned of it from Mr Gurney on 1st April? Miss Warburton’s name does appear on the list
of 20 names that DI Smith made in his daybook while at the crematorium on 1st April. But
that only shows that he knew of it by that date; it does not show that he learned of it for the
first time on that date. His own evidence and that of Mr Gurney was that there was no
generaltrawlthrough the register to find deaths for which Shipman had signed Forms B.
DI Smith had asked only about deaths of which he was already aware. Had there been a
trawl, Miss Warburton’s name would have been found, but so also would the other
Shipman deaths of which he remained ignorant throughout his investigation. So, if
DI Smith did indeed learn of Miss Warburton’s death at the crematorium, it appears that
her death (but not all the other ‘missing’ deaths) must have been mentioned while he was
there. If Miss Warburton’s name were first mentioned by Mr Gurney because he had
noticed it in the register and if it were new to DI Smith, one might have expected DI Smith
to ask whether there were other names of which he was not aware. One might also have
expected him to add Miss Warburton’s name to his spreadsheet on his return to the police
station. He did not do so, although he did insert other information that he had obtained
from Mr Gurney.
84
SHIP02$$17 09-04-03 21:13:14 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
11.8 The other possibility, put to him by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry, was that DI Smith had
asked Mr Gurney about Miss Warburton because, while using his daybook at the
crematorium, he had noticed her name on an earlier page (where, Leading Counsel
suggested, it had been since the meeting with Dr Reynolds). DI Smith denied this
suggestion. His explanation for the presence of Miss Warburton’s name on the earlier
page of his daybook was that he had noted it there, together with the name of Mrs Higgins
and their funeraldirectors, while at the crematorium. He had done so, because he was
thinking of contacting the funeraldirectors to ask for details of those two deaths.
11.9 I find that explanation implausible. First, it is difficult to see why DI Smith should have gone
back to an earlier page of the daybook from that which he was using at the crematorium.
Second, he did not in fact go on to make any further enquiries of the funeraldirectors and,
by 1st April, the date of his visit to the crematorium, it is plain, as I shall explain later, that
his investigation was virtually at an end. Third, the notes on the earlier page of his daybook
record that both Miss Warburton and Mrs Higgins died of a ‘stroke’. That was not
information available from the crematorium. Unless DI Smith had been told by someone
of the cause of death, he would have had to get that information from the copy death
certificates. Both certificates gave the cause of death as ‘cerebrovascular accident’. It
is likely that, if DI Smith had obtained the information from the certificates, he would have
noted the cause of death as ‘cerebrovascular accident’ in each case. Indeed, I do not
think he knew that the term ‘cerebrovascular accident’ had the same meaning as ‘stroke’.
I reject DI Smith’s explanation and think that Counsel’s suggestion is far more likely.
Conclusion
11.10 All the evidence suggests that DI Smith first learned about the death of Miss Warburton in
conversation with Dr Reynolds. That is my conclusion. That being so, it is my view that
DI Smith ought to have investigated with the Coroner the possibility of an autopsy of her
body, as well as that of Mrs Higgins. I cannot be certain that Mr Pollard would have agreed
to that course, although I think it likely that he would. Nor can I be certain that Mr Pollard
would have directed that toxicological tests should be performed. A routine coroner’s
autopsy might well have uncovered the presence of some natural disease that could
account for Miss Warburton’s death. However, if Mr Pollard had spoken to Dr Reynolds
before ordering an autopsy, it seems likely that she would have expressed her belief that,
if Shipman were killing his patients, he was doing it by giving them a drug of some sort. If
DI Smith had had a full conversation with Mr Pollard, he should have passed on
Dr Reynolds’ view about the likely means of killing. On balance, I think it likely that
Mr Pollard would have ordered an autopsy with toxicology and that morphine would have
been detected in Miss Warburton’s body. If a similar examination had been carried out on
the body of Mrs Higgins, morphine would have been found there too.
11.11 It remains to consider whether DI Smith was acting in good faith when giving evidence
about the circumstances in which he first learned of the death of Miss Warburton. I have
already drawn attention to the possibility that he denied receiving the information from
Dr Reynolds because he wished to avoid criticism for failing to arrange an autopsy. I must
also consider why he changed his account shortly before giving evidence.
85
SHIP02$$17 09-04-03 21:13:14 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P011 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
11.12 The report of Detective Chief Superintendent Stelfox, of the GMP, who undertook a review
of the March 1998 police investigation between 23rd Apriland 15th May 2002, raised the
question of how the names of Mrs Higgins and Miss Warburton came to be written on the
page of DI Smith’s daybook on which he had recorded information obtained in the early
stages of his investigation. DCS Stelfox also pointed out that, if, whilst at the crematorium,
DI Smith learned of additional deaths over and above those of which he was already
aware, this new information should have alerted him to the possibility that his bundle of
copy death certificates was incomplete. DCS Stelfox further pointed out that these were
issues which were likely to be raised at the Inquiry. DCS Stelfox’s report became available
on 15th May, very shortly before DI Smith claimed that he had received Miss Warburton’s
copy death certificate from Mr Loader with the others, making 20 certificates in all.
11.13 It appears to me that there must be a connection between the completion of DCS Stelfox’s
report on 15th May and the change in DI Smith’s account, communicated to the Inquiry in
a statement signed on 27th May. It seems likely that, when DI Smith realised that he would
have to explain the source of his information about the death of Miss Warburton, he sought
to do so by claiming that he remembered that he had received 20 certificates from
Mr Loader, including Miss Warburton’s.
11.14 I have given carefulconsideration to the question of whether or not this change of tack was
the result of a genuine process of recollection and deduction. It is natural that DI Smith
should wish to avoid criticism. If the production of evidence by the Inquiry, including
DCS Stelfox’s report, enabled DI Smith genuinely to remember or work out what had
happened, he would be right to put forward those fresh thoughts and recollections and I
would not criticise him for changing his evidence. I regret to say, however, on considering
the matter in the light of all the evidence, that I have been driven to the conclusion that
DI Smith changed his evidence without any honest belief in its accuracy. I do not accept
that his memory has been jogged or refreshed by the production of evidence. I think it far
more likely that he changed it when he realised that he had to produce an explanation
which, if accepted, would account for his knowing of Miss Warburton’s death.
86
SHIP02$$18 13-05-03 11:04:08 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER TWELVE
Mr Alan Massey Visits Shipman
Background
12.1 During and after the police investigation, members of the Brooke Practice noticed that the
numbers of cremation Forms C which they were asked to sign by Shipman reduced
markedly. In the three months from April to June, they signed only two Forms C whereas,
by contrast, they had been asked to complete 15 such forms during the previous three
months. Neither of the deaths in respect of which they were asked to sign Forms C aroused
any suspicion in their minds and, indeed, following investigation of those two deaths by
the Inquiry, both were found to be natural. In addition to those two deaths, there were four
further deaths during the three months from the beginning of April to the end of June 1998,
all of which were followed by burials. Three of those deaths – those of Mrs Winifred Mellor,
Mrs Joan Melia and Mrs Kathleen Grundy – were the subject of convictions at the
criminal trial.
12.2 Dr Reynolds believed that the reduction in the number of cremations had occurred
because Shipman had learned of the police investigation. After Shipman’s conviction,
there was some speculation in the newspapers about the possibility that Shipman had
been ‘tipped off’ about the first police investigation. Some suspicion fell upon the GMP.
However, once the Inquiry began its investigations, another possibility arose, namely that
Shipman had been (intentionally or unintentionally) alerted to the danger of discovery by
a visit from Mr Alan Massey, the funeral director.
12.3 Before the Inquiry started, it had been widely reported that, because of his concerns at
the number of deaths of Shipman’s patients which had occurred and the circumstances
of those deaths, Mr Massey (who was not himself a patient of Shipman) had visited
Shipman by appointment at his surgery in order to seek an explanation. That visit was said
to have taken place towards the end of 1997. When Mr Massey provided a statement to the
Inquiry, he said that he could not recall when he had his meeting with Shipman. A search of
the Market Street Surgery appointments sheets for 1997 and the early part of 1998
revealed no record of an appointment for Mr Massey. However, an appointment was found
for noon on 2nd April 1998. This was during the first police investigation. In due course,
Mr Massey accepted that that must have been the date of his visit.
12.4 It is clear beyond doubt that, when he visited, Mr Massey said something to Shipman
about the deaths of his patients. Mr Massey has vehemently denied the suggestion that
he went to give Shipman a ‘tip off’ about the police investigation. He asserted that, at the
time he saw Shipman, he was unaware that a police investigation was in progress.
12.5 The Inquiry has sought to discover what Mr Massey knew at the time of his visit, why he
went and what he said to Shipman. Before considering the evidence on those topics, it is
necessary to say something about the Massey family.
The Massey Family
12.6 The firm of Frank Massey and Son, Funeral Directors, of Hyde (described in this Report as
‘Masseys’) was started in 1903 by Mr Alan Massey’s grandfather and great-uncle. It
87
SHIP02$$18 13-05-03 11:04:08 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
passed to Mr Massey’s father, who in turn passed it to him. Mr Massey has worked in the
business since the age of 15. In recent years, he has taken a less prominent role and dayto-day
control of the business has been exercised by his daughter, Mrs Bambroffe.
Mrs Bambroffe’s husband, David, has also worked in the business for about ten years. The
business is successful and the family is justly proud of it. Both business and family enjoy
a high reputation in the Hyde area.
12.7 For many years before Shipman’s arrest, the Massey family had held Shipman in high
regard. The family might not have been aware of the fact, but it has clearly emerged in
evidence before the Inquiry that Shipman also had a high regard for them. If the family of
a deceased patient did not have in mind a particular funeral director, Shipman would
suggest that Masseys should be instructed. The firm dealt with the deaths of many of
Shipman’s patients and it was inevitable that there would be quite frequent professional
contact between Shipman and the Massey family. This association did not extend to
friendship or any sort of social contact. When the family’s general practitioner had retired
in 1994, Mrs Bambroffe, her husband and mother transferred to Shipman’s list.
Mrs Bambroffe said that they did so as he seemed so caring and was such a nice person.
During the years that followed, they were entirely satisfied with the care that he gave them.
The Origin of the Concerns about Shipman
12.8 It was Mr Bambroffe who first began to notice odd features about the deaths of Shipman’s
patients. He began to recognise a ‘Shipman death’, even before he knew that Shipman
was the deceased’s doctor. He noticed that the deceased were often sitting up dressed
in their day clothes and showed no sign of having been ill. He and his wife discussed these
concerns and they began to notice other strange features; they realised that Shipman
often seemed to be present at or about the time of the death. In due course, Mr and
Mrs Bambroffe mentioned these matters to Mr and Mrs Massey. Mr Massey did not share
their anxiety. He had every confidence in Shipman.
12.9 As I have mentioned earlier, the time came when Mrs Bambroffe mentioned her concerns
to Dr Booth of the Brooke Practice, on 23rd February 1998. Dr Booth discussed those
concerns with some of her partners, including Dr MacGillivray. Not long afterwards,
Dr MacGillivray visited Masseys’ premises and took the opportunity to raise the subject
with Mr Massey. The gist of what he said was that there was no need to worry about the
deaths of Shipman’s patients. Shipman had a large list of elderly patients; he liked to keep
his elderly patients at home rather than admit them to hospital and he visited them much
more frequently than other doctors. These factors would account for the large number of
deaths and Shipman’s presence at or about the time of death. In his Inquiry statement
made in January 2002, Mr Massey claimed that he had not felt reassured by
Dr MacGillivray’s words and therefore decided to visit Shipman. I am sure he is wrong
about his reaction to Dr MacGillivray and about the timing of his decision to visit Shipman.
I am sure that, at the time, Mr Massey was not worried about Shipman and merely passed
on the reassurance to his daughter and son-in-law. He did not visit Shipman at that point.
Mr Massey’s State of Mind in March 1998
12.10 Mr Massey claimed that, in March 1998, he too began to have concerns about the deaths
of Shipman’s patients. He said that his concerns were aroused by the death of
88
SHIP02$$18 13-05-03 11:04:08 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
Mrs Margaret Waldron, who died on 6th March. She was a friend of the Massey family. [My
finding in respect of Mrs Waldron’s death is set out in Volume Six of my First Report. I found
that Shipman killed her.] Mr Massey explained why he had been suspicious about the
circumstances of her death. However, his recollections bear little relation to the true
circumstances of the death and what he recalled did not appear to me to form a basis for
reasonable suspicion. I accept without hesitation that Mr Massey was shocked and
distressed to learn of Mrs Waldron’s death but I do not accept that he harboured any
concerns that her death might not have been natural or might be in any way associated
with Shipman. The first time he mentioned any such concern was when he gave oral
evidence to the Inquiry. He had failed to mention it in his written statements. Mr and
Mrs Bambroffe had no recollection of him expressing any such concern. Mrs Bambroffe
said that there was no discussion about this death in particular. She recalled that the death
was quite sudden although Mrs Waldron had ‘been to see the doctor beforehand’. In my
judgement, Mr Massey did not share the concerns of his daughter and son-in-law in March
1998. In rejecting Mr Massey’s evidence on this point, I do not wish to suggest that he has
attempted to deceive or mislead the Inquiry. I think that now, with the benefit of hindsight,
he finds it hard to believe that he did not share the concerns of his daughter and son-inlaw.
He has persuaded himself that he did.
12.11 That is how things stood on 13th March 1998, when Mr and Mrs Massey went away on
holiday for two weeks. They were away until 28th March. It was during this period that
Dr Reynolds and the other Brooke Practice doctors decided to report their concerns about
Shipman to the Coroner and the police investigation began.
Mr Massey Decides to Visit Shipman
12.12 I have already referred to the various contacts made between Mrs Bambroffe and
Dr Reynolds and Dr Booth. The evidence about those contacts is not entirely clear. What
is clear, however, is that Dr Reynolds spoke to Mrs Bambroffe at 2.41pm on Tuesday,
24th March, at a time when Dr Reynolds had already made her report to the Coroner and
was awaiting a visit from DI Smith. In evidence, Mrs Bambroffe said that Dr Reynolds told
her either that she was about to make a report to the Coroner or that she had already done
so. Bearing in mind the timing of this conversation, I am satisfied that Dr Reynolds said that
she had made a report to the Coroner. I think it likely that she also said that the police had
become involved. Even if she did not, this does not matter, as Mrs Bambroffe said that she
realised that, if the Coroner had been informed, the police also might well be involved.
12.13 Mrs Bambroffe said that, when her father returned from holiday on 28th March, she told him
of the developments in the Shipman matter. I think she would have told him by Monday,
30th March, at the latest. Mr Massey accepted that his daughter would have told him what
she knew. Within a very short time, Mr Massey had decided to visit Shipman. Mr Massey
asserted that, at that time, he did not know that the police or the Coroner were involved.
He, together with Mrs Bambroffe, also insisted that he would not have decided to speak
to Shipman if he had known that an investigation was under way. I noticed that
Mrs Bambroffe was most uncomfortable when giving this part of her evidence and think it
likely that she was not sure that what she was saying was true and accurate. Mr Massey
said that his daughter and son-in-law were opposed to him visiting Shipman; they told him
89
SHIP02$$18 13-05-03 11:04:08 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
to ‘leave it alone’. He could not offer a sensible reason for this opposition but said that he
thought his daughter was being ‘a bit protective’ of him. Mr and Mrs Bambroffe agreed that
they were opposed to the proposed visit. They were unable to explain why. They said that
it was not because of any concern about the effect on their business if it were to become
known that they had made unfounded allegations against Shipman.
12.14 In my view, Mr Massey was aware of the report to the Coroner and probably realised that
the police would also be involved. In my judgement, Mr Massey decided to see Shipman
because he thought that things had ‘gone too far’. Now that the truth is known about
Shipman, Mr Massey cannot believe that he went to see Shipman at such an inappropriate
time. His daughter and son-in-law, motivated by the respect and affection in which they
hold Mr Massey, have allowed themselves to be persuaded that Mr Massey could not
have known of the Coroner’s involvement at the time he went to visit Shipman. I think that,
when Mrs Bambroffe gave evidence, she still remained in a state of conflict and
uncertainty about this issue.
12.15 What was Mr Massey’s purpose in making this visit? In his Inquiry statement made in
January 2002, Mr Massey said that he wanted to see Shipman in order to satisfy himself
that Masseys were not involved in ‘anything untoward’. In his Inquiry statement of April
2002, he said that he went because he had become concerned about the number and
circumstances of the deaths about which his daughter was telling him. I have already said
that I do not accept that Mr Massey shared the concerns of the younger generation before
he went away. There is no evidence that anything occurred on his return that might have
caused him to take a different view. When giving oral evidence, Mr Massey said that, when
he returned from holiday, he was concerned about the number of deaths among
Shipman’s patients and the similar circumstances in which they were happening and
decided that something had to be done. He felt that there was something ‘not quite right’.
Mr and Mrs Bambroffe both said that they understood that Mr Massey’s motive was to ask
Shipman for an explanation for the large numbers of patient deaths in his practice. I regret
to say that I find none of these explanations at all convincing.
12.16 As I have said, Mr Massey did visit Shipman on 2nd April. He said that he was very nervous
about going; he was shaking and sweating while in the waiting room. I can well understand
that. Whatever his motive for going and whatever he planned to say, he might well dread
the interview. He has given differing accounts of exactly what he said. In his Inquiry
statement of January 2002, he said that he had told Shipman that he ‘had one or two
concerns about the number of deaths Masseys seem to be getting’ from him. In his
Inquiry statement of February 2002, he said that he told Shipman that ‘people had been
talking about the high rate of deaths among his patients’. In his statement made in
April 2002, he claimed that he said ‘something like ‘‘We’ve got concerns about the
number of deaths of your patients’’’. In oral evidence, he said that, when he sat down,
he told Shipman that ‘they’ (impliedly meaning Masseys) were concerned that they were
getting a lot of deaths of elderly ladies fully clothed who were sitting up or had been out
shopping. Later in his evidence, when asked about the reference in one of his statements
to ‘people had been talking about the high rate of deaths’, he explained that he had
used the word ‘people’ to distance his own family from the concerns. Mr Massey denied
90
SHIP02$$18 13-05-03 11:04:08 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
that he had said anything to Shipman about a report to the Coroner or an investigation by
anyone in authority.
12.17 Mr Massey has consistently reported that Shipman’s response was to say that the deaths
of his patients were all properly recorded in his book, which Mr Massey took (no doubt
correctly) to be his book of MCCDs. In oral evidence, Mr Massey added that Shipman said
that the book was available for anybody to see. In his Inquiry statement of January 2002,
he said that Shipman had said that the book was ‘open for inspection by any of the
authorities that wanted to see it’. In his April 2002 statement, he said that the book was
open for inspection by ‘anybody concerned’. Mr Massey said that Shipman took down
the book from a shelf or cabinet and showed Mr Massey various names and causes of
death. He was very relaxed and confident and friendly. He and Mr Massey went on to
exchange pleasantries. Shipman did not seem at all worried or even concerned to know
that he was being talked about. Mr Massey said that he felt reassured and that he had
been given an explanation. When pressed, he agreed that he had not received an
explanation for anything. He had just been reassured by Shipman’s confident manner.
12.18 When he returned home, Mr Massey assured his family that there was nothing to worry
about. Shipman had been very nice and quite relaxed. I think Mr Massey was convinced
that the concerns and suspicions were misconceived.
Conclusion
12.19 My conclusion is that Mr Massey at no time shared the concerns of the doctors from the
Brooke Practice and the younger generation within his family. I am sure he thought they
were wrong about Shipman. In my view, he decided to see Shipman because he thought
that to make a report to the Coroner had been to take things too far. He thought Shipman
ought to know what was being said about him. I think he gave Shipman to understand that
people were talking about the number of deaths among his patients. I do not think he told
him that there had been a report to the Coroner.
12.20 I am sure that Mr Massey made it plain to Shipman that he did not share the suspicions
that were being voiced by others. I think he was also anxious to avoid giving the
impression that the concerns had arisen within his own family. Mr Massey says that
Shipman did not ask him the identity of the people who were ‘talking’. I accept entirely
Mr Massey’s account of Shipman’s reaction. Shipman was an accomplished liar and
dissembler and it was entirely typical of him that he should give the impression that he was
not in the least worried about any rumour or gossip.
12.21 In rejecting some of the evidence of the Massey family, I do not wish it to be thought that
I regard them as dishonest. I do not, for one moment, think they are. Looking at these
events with the benefit of hindsight, I think that they have found it impossible to remember
and to accept that Mr Massey believed that the people who suspected Shipman were
making a mistake. I think they have persuaded themselves that Mr Massey shared the
concerns of the younger generation. I think they have talked about these matters at great
length on many occasions and have convinced themselves that Mr Massey wanted to
seek an explanation from Shipman for the large number of deaths. They cannot remember
91
SHIP02$$18 13-05-03 11:04:08 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P012 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
why the family was in disagreement because, on the accounts they now give, there is no
explanation for the rift. They have persuaded themselves that Mr Massey cannot have
known of the involvement of the Coroner because they now see that it was wrong (or at
least unwise) for Mr Massey to visit Shipman at that stage, while the Coroner was involved.
As they regard themselves as decent, law-abiding citizens, which they are, they cannot
believe that one of them once supported the man who is now known to be a mass
murderer. Mr Massey need not feel embarrassed that he once supported Shipman. So did
many others. Mr Massey had received reassurance from Dr MacGillivray. In the event, the
trust of both of them in Shipman was misplaced.
12.22 I am satisfied that Mr Massey did alert Shipman to the fact that he was under some
suspicion, possibly even some investigation. I think the consequence was that Shipman
stopped killing for a time. It is likely that Shipman deduced that, if the Masseys knew of
people who were ‘talking’, it might well be that the source of the concern was the doctors
from the Brooke Practice. I think that is why, when he resumed killing on 11th May, he chose
a victim who would not be cremated. Mrs Winifred Mellor had made it known that she had
a strong preference for burial. There is no evidence that he discovered the preferences
for burial of his other two victims; indeed, Mrs Woodruff, Mrs Grundy’s daughter, is
adamant that Shipman could not have known what method of disposal would be chosen
for Mrs Grundy, as it was Mrs Woodruff herself who chose burial. When Shipman forged
Mrs Grundy’s will, he specified that it was her wish to be cremated.
12.23 In my judgement, Mr Massey’s action in speaking to Shipman did not lead to any loss of
life. If anything, he may have saved lives. Shipman had been killing at the rate of one
patient a week during the three months before Mr Massey’s visit. If he had continued at
that rate, more patients would have died than in fact did so. On the other hand, had the
rate of killing continued unabated, it may be that Shipman would have been detected and
stopped sooner than he was.
12.24 I am sure that Mr Massey acted with good intentions when he went to see Shipman. He is
a thoroughly decent man. His mistake was that, like countless others in Hyde, he trusted,
admired and respected Shipman and could not believe that the suspicions harboured by
his daughter and the Brooke Practice doctors could have any foundation. I think he has
found it very hard, indeed impossible, to accept that this was once his state of mind.
92
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The End of the Investigation
Two Weeks Pass
13.1 Following his visit to the crematorium on 1st April 1998, Detective Inspector Smith did not
take any further steps in connection with the investigation until 15th April. He had rest days
on 4th, 11th and 12th April; the 10th was Good Friday, a public holiday. He was due to go on
a week’s holiday from the evening of Friday, 17th April. This was to be followed by a training
course that would last a further week.
13.2 After two weeks of inactivity so far as the Shipman investigation was concerned, DI Smith
suddenly sprang into action. On 15th, 16th and 17th April, there was a flurry ofactivity. By
17th April, the investigation had been closed. I have already said that I believe that, when
he left Selbourne House on 1st April, DI Smith had concluded that Dr Reynolds’ concerns
were without foundation. It is hard to resist the inference that DI Smith decided to tie up
the loose ends and close the investigation before leaving his desk for two weeks.
Detective Inspector Smith Meets the MasseyFamily
13.3 As I mentioned earlier, DI Smith believed that it was during, or just after, his visit to the
crematorium that he came to the conclusion that he knew the name ofthe female
undertaker who had been concerned about the deaths ofShipman’s patients. On the
morning of15th April, he telephoned Masseys’ premises and arranged to see
Mrs Bambroffe, either later that day or possibly on the following day. There is no record of
the appointment and members ofthe Massey family are not sure ofthe date ofthe visit. I
think it highly likely that DI Smith visited on 15th April. The meeting took place at the
Masseys’ premises and was attended by Mr Massey and Mr Bambroffe, as well as
DI Smith and Mrs Bambroffe.
13.4 DI Smith has given a number ofaccounts ofthis meeting. In his first written report ofAugust
1998, he said that Mrs Bambroffe had told him that all she had done was to repeat the
‘general chit-chat and gossip’ she had heard circulating about Shipman. In April 2000,
Detective Superintendent Ellis reported that Mrs Bambroffe had told DI Smith that her
expressions ofconcern were based on ‘gossip, innuendo and ... coincidence’. In his
manuscript notes of his interview with DI Smith, Det Supt Ellis recorded that Mrs Bambroffe
and Mr Massey had told him that they ‘just laugh and joke about it’. Mrs Bambroffe had,
he said, maintained this stance despite being ‘pushed’ by him. In his statement to the
WPHA, DI Smith said that Mrs Bambroffe provided no substantial information; it appeared
that her concerns were based on gossip. He repeated this assertion in his first Inquiry
statement.
13.5 However, when DI Smith came to give oral evidence, he conceded that part ofwhat he
had said to Det Supt Ellis had been ‘incorrect’. He accepted that Mrs Bambroffe had never
said that her concerns were based on gossip or were ever the subject ofjokes. His
account was that, after confirming that she was indeed the undertaker who had expressed
concerns to Dr Reynolds, she had listened to his account ofDr Reynolds’ concerns and
93
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
what he had done to investigate them. He said that he was trying to reassure
Mrs Bambroffe that she had not been disregarded. He had asked her if there was anything
else she wanted to add but she had volunteered nothing. He did not ask her to elaborate
upon her concerns, despite the fact that all he had at that time was a third-hand (or
possibly fourth-hand) account of those concerns. He said that Mr Massey ‘became more
prominent’ in the conversation and that he, not Mrs Bambroffe, referred to the part played
by rumour and speculation. DI Smith agreed that he did not ask Mrs Bambroffe for
first-hand information about the circumstances of the deaths she had attended. Nor did
he ask to see the firm’s records relating to the deaths ofShipman’s patients. In short, it
appeared from his own account in oral evidence that his purpose had been to impart
information rather than receive it.
13.6 According to the Massey family, the discussion with DI Smith was fairly short and very
general. It lasted only 10 to 15 minutes and was more ofa chat than an interview. DI Smith
asked whether Mrs Bambroffe was the female undertaker he was seeking and she
confirmed that she was. The family said that he asked hardly any other questions and did
not seek any information. His manner was reassuring and they were left with the feeling
that the police had undertaken a thorough investigation. Nothing untoward had been
discovered so far. The family was not told that the investigation was at an end although
they got the impression that it was approaching its conclusion.
13.7 Mrs Bambroffe told the Inquiry that, if DI Smith had asked her to explain why she had been
concerned about Shipman’s patients, she would have been willing to do so. She would
have said that, not only did it appear to her that there were a lot ofdeaths, but also that the
circumstances were unusual. In her experience, it was unusual for an elderly person to die
alone at home. Usually, a relative or friend was present, and the patient was in bed and
appeared to have been ill. By contrast, Shipman’s patients often seemed to die alone.
Frequently, they were found dressed in day clothes, sitting up in a chair with no sign of
illness. She and her husband had come to recognise features typical of the deaths of
Shipman’s patients. She was concerned also about Shipman’s presence in the house at
or about the time ofthe discovery ofthe death. She had sometimes wondered how he had
gained access to the house. In her experience, elderly people were usually security
conscious and it was often not possible to gain access when a body was lying dead. She
had also noticed that there seemed to be quite a lot ofunexpected deaths. Yet, instead of
referring them to the coroner, as other doctors would, Shipman was always willing to
certify the cause of death himself.
13.8 Mrs Bambroffe said that the firm held records of the funerals they had conducted and she
would have been able to produce the records for all nine of the deaths of Shipman’s
patients which had been dealt with by Masseys and ofwhich DI Smith was already aware.
She would also have known that there were other deaths, not on his list, and would have
been able to tell him about five more deaths during the preceding six months ofwhich he
was unaware. This would have alerted him to the fact that his bundle of copy death
certificates was incomplete. Had DI Smith asked members ofthe Massey family what they
could remember about individual deaths, they would have been able to provide some
useful information about the circumstances in which the body was found, who was present
and whether the family appeared to be shocked by the suddenness of the death. They
94
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
would also have been able to tell him that they knew ofpeople who had given money to
the scanner appeal.
13.9 It was common ground that, after confirming that he had found the right undertaker, the
only question DI Smith asked was whether Mrs Bambroffe had anything to add. She said
she had not. As he appeared to have received information from Dr Reynolds and as he had
spoken so reassuringly to her, giving the impression that he was conducting a thorough
investigation, I can well understand why she answered in that way.
13.10 Mrs Bambroffe said that at no time did she say that her concerns had been based on
rumour, gossip or innuendo. I accept that she did not. However, when DI Smith told the
family, as I think he probably did, that he had found no evidence to substantiate the
concerns, I think it highly likely that Mr Massey repeated his view that the concerns were
without foundation. DI Smith recalls that Mr Massey took a more dominant part in the
conversation towards the end ofthe meeting. I think that is probably so. I think that, in the
light of DI Smith’s information and attitude, Mrs Bambroffe felt there was nothing more she
could say.
13.11 It is clear that DI Smith did not take the opportunity offered by this meeting to advance his
knowledge about the deaths ofShipman’s patients. His method ofrecounting what he had
done did not encourage the Massey family to volunteer what they knew. It is plain that this
was not an evidence-gathering exercise. It is to his credit that he gave a truthful account
in oral evidence. However, his earlier untruthful accounts, in which he stated that
Mrs Bambroffe told him that her concerns had been based on gossip and innuendo and
had been the subject ofjokes within the family, do him great discredit.
13.12 It is common ground that no member of the Massey family informed DI Smith that
Mr Massey had visited Shipman on 2nd April. They said that they had not thought to do so.
I think they were embarrassed that Mr Massey had visited Shipman while an investigation
was under way. I think they would have answered truthfully if asked about the visit but were
probably relieved that they were not.
13.13 DI Smith says that, ifhe had learned that Mr Massey had visited Shipman and that
Shipman might have become aware that he was being investigated, he would have
considered seeking permission to abandon the need for confidentiality. I do not accept
that evidence. DI Smith had already concluded that Dr Reynolds’ concerns were without
foundation. The discovery that Mr Massey had visited Shipman would not have affected
that view.
13.14 DI Smith agreed that, at the end ofthis meeting, he had learned nothing new. He was no
nearer an understanding ofthe comparative death rates. He had established that all but
two ofthe deaths ofwhich he knew involved female patients and that most ofthe deceased
were elderly. He did not know which ofthe deceased, ifany, had been found in their day
clothes, as he had never asked. He did not understand the basis underlying the concerns
of Dr Reynolds and the Bambroffes. Yet, he had already decided that there was no
evidence to support Dr Reynolds’ concerns.
Detective Inspector Smith Proposes to Close the Investigation
13.15 On or shortly before 16th April 1998, DI Smith discussed with ChiefSuperintendent Sykes
his beliefthat there was no foundation in the concerns expressed by Dr Reynolds. It seems
95
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
to have been agreed that the matter should be closed. CS Sykes did not have a clear
recollection ofeverything he was told about the investigation. However, he said that he did
not have an in-depth discussion about the issues and the evidence. He remembered that
DI Smith said that Dr Banks had found no evidence of criminality in the medical records.
He had the impression that that marked the end point ofthe investigation. He could not
recall what had been said about the visit to the Masseys, although he remembered
DI Smith using the expression ‘gossip and innuendo’. He could not remember whether
those words were used in connection with the Masseys.
13.16 It appears that the decision to close the investigation was taken without any detailed
discussion ofthe issues raised. DI Smith was not required to explain to CS Sykes how and
why he had reached the conclusion that Dr Reynolds’ beliefthat Shipman’s death rate was
very high was unfounded. He was not required to explain, for example, that he was
satisfied that Dr Reynolds’ figures were wrong or that, although the death rate might be
high, there were good explanations for it. Nor was he required to explain what steps he
had taken to find evidence ofthe common features. In short, CS Sykes delegated to
DI Smith the decision to close the investigation. In this, he breached an important tenet of
criminal investigation, which is that the supervising officer should make the decision to
close an investigation. That decision should be independent ofthe advice ofthe officer
who has conducted it. CS Sykes did not ask DI Smith to write a report, which would be the
normal procedure upon the closure ofany criminal investigation.
Detective Inspector Smith’s Second Visit to Dr Reynolds
13.17 DI Smith tried to contact the Coroner on the morning of16th April. He also telephoned
Dr Reynolds’ surgery and made an appointment to see her later that day.
13.18 In her statement, Dr Reynolds said that, when they met, DI Smith told her that he had been
unable to find any evidence to confirm her suspicions. He said that Shipman was well
loved by his patients. DI Smith had found no apparent motive, financial or otherwise, for
Shipman to harm his patients. He said that he had investigated her concerns and that no
further action would be taken at present.
13.19 DI Smith said that he explained the outcome ofhis enquiries to Dr Reynolds and told her
that there was insufficient evidence to justify further investigations. He had found no
evidence ofcriminality. He did not recall mentioning the lack ofmotive, although he
agreed that it had been a consideration in his thinking. He believed that he told
Dr Reynolds that he had had 20 sets ofmedical records examined. He said that he
mentioned the possibility ofconducting an autopsy in the future. He did not remember
asking whether there had been any further deaths since he had last seen her. He said that
he told her there was nothing further he could do at that time.
13.20 DI Smith said that he had the impression that Dr Reynolds was disappointed with what he
told her and that she remained concerned. This impression is confirmed by Mr Reynolds
and by the other doctors at the Brooke Practice. Mr Reynolds recalled that, after this
second meeting with DI Smith, his wife told him that the emphasis appeared to be on the
apparent absence ofany motive for Shipman to kill his patients. She was concerned, not
96
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
with possible motive, but with the disparity between the death rates in her practice and
that ofShipman. She had been disappointed not to have any explanation for that. She had
also been surprised that DI Smith had not spoken to her partners.
13.21 I find that DI Smith did mention that Shipman did not appear to have any motive for harming
his patients. I think it unlikely that he said that he had had 20 sets ofmedical records
examined. Ifhe did make that claim, it would have been inaccurate, as, at that time, he
had had only 15 sets examined, and had not yet received the result on the 15th set. It is
possible that he told Dr Reynolds that he had had 14 or 15 sets examined, in which case
she might well have thought that these were 14 or 15 ofthe 16 deaths about which she had
told the Coroner and which had occurred during the previous three months. Had DI Smith
mentioned 20 deaths, said to have occurred over a period ofsix months, I think
Dr Reynolds would have queried his figures. I am quite satisfied that DI Smith did not give
any explanation for the disparity in death rates; he was plainly not in a position to do so.
For reasons that I shall explain shortly, I do not accept that DI Smith told Dr Reynolds that
it might be possible to arrange an autopsy ifany further deaths were to occur.
Detective Inspector Smith Speaks to the Coroner
13.22 On the following day, Friday, 17th April, DI Smith telephoned the Coroner at 10.13am.
Again, the call was brief and it seems likely that he left a message for Mr Pollard. Soon after
2pm, Mr Pollard telephoned DI Smith. Mr Pollard’s note ofthe conversation records that
DI Smith referred to a visit to Dr Reynolds and to the ‘FP Cttee’, by which he must have
meant the Family Practitioner Committee ofthe WPHA. The note mentions that two sets of
records had been ‘questioned’. This must have been a reference to the two sets of
records that Dr Banks thought did not disclose sufficient information to allow a proper
diagnosis ofthe cause ofdeath. Mr Pollard recorded that there had been nothing that
‘gave anyindication of anycriminal acts’. The note says that DI Smith had seen the
cremation records of20 people and that, ofthose people, there was an approximately
70% to 30% split between cremation and burial. In fact, this was inaccurate, as the
split was 85% to 15%. The note also says that the undertakers had been seen by the
police. Most funerals had been done by Masseys of Hyde. DI Smith had ‘seen Debbie
± the u/takers:’. Finally, it is noted that:
‘Dr S tries to get all his patients out of hospital. He works v. much like the
old GP who will call in ± homes without appointment.
All is OK.’
13.23 When going through his note in evidence, Mr Pollard said that he was not told the reason
why the doctor who had examined the medical records had ‘questioned’ two cases and
he did not ask. He thought he ought to have been told if, in fact, the reason these two cases
had been questioned was because the doctor thought there was insufficient information
to make a diagnosis ofthe cause ofdeath so that the deaths should have been referred
to the coroner.
13.24 Mr Pollard said that, when he was told that the cremation records showed a 70% to 30%
split between cremation and burial, he thought that this meant that the cremation figures
97
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
which had initially been reported to him (16 in three months) had not included the burials,
so that the total number ofdeaths must have been higher than Dr Reynolds had realised.
Mr Pollard did not record the period over which the deaths had occurred. It appears that
he never realised that DI Smith had been looking at the deaths over a six-month period
rather than the three months considered by Dr Reynolds. Mr Pollard did not gain the
impression that DI Smith attached importance to the cremation/burial split for any other
reason than that it showed that the number ofdeaths was higher than had been thought.
13.25 Mr Pollard’s overwhelming impression ofthe conversation was that DI Smith was telling
him that he had carried out a full investigation, so far as confidentiality allowed, and was
satisfied that there was nothing to justify further police involvement. DI Smith’s explanation
for the high number of deaths was that Shipman liked to keep his elderly patients out of
hospital. Also, he was an old-fashioned doctor who called on his patients unannounced.
The first explanation might account for a higher than usual number of deaths at home
among his elderly patients. The second explanation would not account for a high death
rate but might explain why Shipman was often present at or about the time of death.
Mr Pollard told the Inquiry that he accepted the explanation as adequate because he
relied entirely on the probity ofthe investigation conducted by DI Smith.
13.26 DI Smith made no notes ofhis conversation with Mr Pollard. However, he said that, over
the telephone, he told Mr Pollard what he had done during the investigation. He had seen
Mr Loader, Mr Gurney and the Health Authority. He said that he concluded that the
concerns seemed to stem mainly from rumour and speculation. He had asked Dr Banks
to analyse the medical records but he had found nothing untoward in the causes of death.
DI Smith said that he took Mr Pollard through the list ofthe deceased, identifying the
causes ofdeath. He said that he did not go into detail about the individual cases. I am sure
that is right; he could not possibly have done so. DI Smith thought that he had told
Mr Pollard that there were some cases where the Health Authority doctor believed that the
death should have been reported to the Coroner. Mr Pollard had no recollection ofany
such remark; nor did he note it. I do not think this was said; ifit had been, Mr Pollard would
have noted it.
13.27 DI Smith claimed that he told the Coroner that he had gone as far as he could in
investigating the allegations on a confidential basis. He said he suggested that, ifthe
matter were to proceed further, there were two possible courses of action. One was to
have an autopsy carried out on the next patient ofShipman to die. The other was to speak
to some ofthe relatives ofthose who had died, or ofthe next one to die, to see ifthey had
any concerns about the death. DI Smith told the Inquiry that he was not advocating that
these steps be taken, as they would entail moving away from a confidential investigation
and he did not think this was justified. He was just suggesting possible options for the
future if the Coroner were minded to continue the enquiry. However, he said that the
Coroner did not take him up on either ofthese suggestions. In April 2000, DI Smith had
told Det Supt Ellis that he had suggested the possibility ofan autopsy in future but the
Coroner had been opposed to the idea.
13.28 Mr Pollard said that he had no clear recollection ofthis conversation other than that which
had been recorded in his note. He did not recall DI Smith saying that the concerns had
98
SHIP02$$19 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
been based on rumour and speculation but he accepted that was possible. Mr Pollard had
no recollection ofDI Smith going through a list ofdeceased patients and telling him the
causes ofdeath. Nor did he remember any suggestion that there might be an autopsy in
the future. He pointed out that such a suggestion would have been quite inconsistent with
the general thrust ofDI Smith’s message, which was that there was nothing to be
concerned about. I accept Mr Pollard’s evidence on that. I am sure that DI Smith did not
suggest a future autopsy, either to Mr Pollard or during his conversation the previous day
with Dr Reynolds. Mr Pollard said that he had no recollection ofDI Smith suggesting that
relatives should be approached. Once again, he pointed out that such future action would
be inappropriate ifDI Smith had come to the conclusion that there was no cause for
concern. I find that DI Smith made no such suggestion.
13.29 Mr Pollard said that he did not think deeply about the explanations that DI Smith had put
forward. He said that the result of the enquiries did not come as a surprise to him;
Dr Reynolds had always recognised the possibility that Shipman might be an
exceptionally caring doctor. It did not occur to him to question whether the proffered
explanations could satisfactorily account for the startling disparity in death rates. He did
not think ofasking whether Dr Reynolds was satisfied with the results and he did not
contact her again. Nor did he make any enquiries about more recent deaths among
Shipman’s patients. In short, he accepted without question that the police enquiry had
revealed nothing ofconcern and put the whole matter out ofhis mind.
13.30 The first police investigation was now at an end.
99
SHIP02P013 09-04-03 21:25:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P013 Page Type: BLANK ProofRound: 3
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Internal Enquiries by the Greater Manchester Police
Chief Superintendent Sykes Speaks to Mr Postles
14.1 Chief Superintendent Sykes said that he discussed the closure of the investigation with
Mr Postles. He said that it was not possible to discuss the issues in detail, as there were
no written records and he was dependent on his recollection of what Detective Inspector
Smith had told him. He said that Mr Postles was satisfied that the investigation had been
properly conducted. Initially, CS Sykes appeared to suggest that this conversation took
place before the decision to close the investigation was taken; however, in his oral
evidence to the Inquiry, he seemed to accept Mr Postles’ assertion that it took place some
time after the decision had been taken.
14.2 Mr Postles told the Inquiry that he recalled a conversation with CS Sykes. He said that it
had occurred ‘some weeks’ after he had first learned of the investigation, which was on
25th March 1998. He recalled that CS Sykes told him that the information elicited from
various sources did not point to any wrongdoing by Shipman. In particular, he was told
that, in the case of all the deaths that DISmith had established had occurred within the
last six months, the cause of death was, according to the Health Authority, consistent with
the individual’s medical condition.
14.3 In his Inquiry statement, Mr Postles also said that CS Sykes told him that DI Smith had
established with the Health Authority that the number of deaths for which the register office
had supplied details was not believed to be inordinately excessive. This is puzzling, as
there is no evidence that Dr Banks and DISmith discussed the death rate among
Shipman’s patients. There is, however, evidence that they discussed the size of
Shipman’s patient list and it is likely that Dr Banks expressed a view that the death rate did
not seem inordinately high. CS Sykes does not remember saying anything of this nature
to Mr Postles. In oral evidence, Mr Postles said that he was unsure about this aspect of his
statement and thought he might have been referring to knowledge gained at a later time.
Ithink that is probably the case.
14.4 Ithink the conversation between these two officers must have been of a fairly casual nature
and Idoubt whether CS Sykes was formally seeking Mr Postles’ approval of his decision
to close the investigation. Had that been the case, Mr Postles would have called for
DISmith’s report and would have discovered that no such report existed. Iam satisfied
that Mr Postles did not realise until August 1998 that DISmith had not written a report.
14.5 It is most unfortunate that CS Sykes did not call for a written report at the time of the closure
of the investigation or soon afterwards. If DI Smith had written a report while events were
still fresh in his mind and before he realised that he had reached the wrong conclusion, I
am sure that the report would have been more detailed and accurate than the one written
in August 1998. At that time, in April or May 1998, DISmith would have had no motive
(whether conscious or sub-conscious) to understate the seriousness of Dr Reynolds’
concerns. It is likely that a report written at that time would have included reference to the
comparative death rates provided by Dr Reynolds. These were not mentioned in
101
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
DISmith’s report of August 1998. If the report had been seen by CS Sykes, as it should
have been, and if it had contained no reference to the comparative death rates, he would
surely have noticed the omission. If Mr Postles had become aware of the comparative
death rates, he would, Iam sure, have wished to discuss with DISmith how that aspect of
Dr Reynolds’ concerns had been resolved. He would have found that it had not been. That
might well have resulted in the re-opening of the first investigation.
August 1998
14.6 No report of any kind had been written when, in August 1998, Mr Postles was put in charge
of the investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. That investigation rapidly
widened to include enquiries into the deaths of more of Shipman’s former patients.
Mr Postles wished to draw on the information uncovered in the first investigation. He then
found that DISmith had not kept any written records save for the scanty notes in his
daybook and had not submitted a written report. He asked DISmith to make good that
omission. That is how the first of DISmith’s written accounts came into existence. The first
report was dated 17th August 1998. DISmith reported that:
(a) He had acted on a request from the Coroner who said that Dr Reynolds had raised
concerns about deaths certified by Shipman. Since her arrival in Hyde in 1997 (in
fact, she arrived in September 1996), there had been ‘general banter’ amongst her
practice partners that Shipman supplied them with ‘pocket money’ by asking them
to countersign his cremation certificates. In addition, there was concern about a
number of ‘alleged features’ of the deaths. These were that the persons were mainly
female; they were found dead by Shipman; they were found wearing day clothes and
the majority appeared to have been cremated.
(b) At interview, Dr Reynolds had repeated the information she had given to the Coroner.
She had said that a local undertaker, who did not wish to be identified, had become
aware of the circumstances of the deaths and it appeared that it was common gossip
among doctors, nurses and undertakers that there were more deaths among
Shipman’s elderly female patients than in other practices. There was no evidence to
support this rumour. Dr Reynolds did not wish her name to be made known during
the investigation. She had made her report for peace of mind after consultation with
her partners.
(c) DISmith had later learned that Shipman had had a disagreement with his ‘previous
practice partner [sic]’ and was now a sole practitioner. This had created problems
for Shipman, who now asked members of the Brooke Practice to countersign
cremation certificates.
(d) Mr Loader had identified 19 deaths as the result of a search for all the deaths certified
by Shipman during the previous six months.
(e) Enquiries at the crematorium had shown that, of those 19 deceased, 16 had been
cremated and three buried. The usual proportion was 70% cremations. The funeral
directors were various local firms.
102
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
(f) The undertaker mentioned by Dr Reynolds had been identified and interviewed but
had said that she was only repeating ‘general chit-chat and gossipthat had been
circulating for some time’. This was supported by her father, who was present.
(g) An approach had been made to the ‘Family Practitioners’ at Selbourne House,
Hyde, with a view to examining patient records of the deceased persons. DISmith
had requested that each set of records be examined with a view to identifying
whether the cause of death was consistent with the treatment being prescribed.
There did not appear to be any cause for concern.
(h) DISmith claimed that enquiries into the ‘finding of the bodies’ were commenced
but that, due to the limited sources of information available, it was difficult to identify
all the circumstances. It was established that, at some of the deaths, other persons
had been present such as the police, ambulance personnel and doctors from the
emergency service. Some of the deceased had died in nursing homes.
(i) Shipman was regarded as being of the ‘old school’. He made a lot of house calls and
spent time with his patients. He would call unannounced. He was popular and there
was a queue of people seeking acceptance onto his patient list.
(j) The investigation had not revealed any evidence to indicate that the deaths were
anything but normal. Due to the requirements of confidentiality, it had not been
possible to pursue all lines of enquiry (the nature of which were not specified) to a
satisfactory conclusion.
(k) The findings were passed to Mr Pollard who was satisfied.
14.7 It will be noted that this account was very different from that given by DI Smith to the
Inquiry. His references to gossip, banter and chit-chat were untrue. They diminished the
seriousness of Dr Reynolds’ concerns to the point where any police officer reading the
report would think that this investigation had amounted almost to a waste of police time.
It will be noted that the account made no reference to the high death rate about which
Dr Reynolds had expressed concern to both the Coroner and DISmith. No numbers were
quoted, despite the fact that these appeared in DISmith’s daybook as one of Dr Reynolds’
prime concerns. Inote also that the report gave the impression that the undertaker
(Mrs Bambroffe) was interviewed at an early stage, whereas in fact she was seen right at
the end. The account of her evidence was untrue. DISmith’s claim that he had made
enquiries into the circumstances of the ‘finding of the bodies’ was misleading, although
probably not deliberately so. He had found some evidence from Dr Banks (which is
quoted) but had failed to make any other enquiry, although other sources of information
were available to him. Iaccept that he had failed to think of the other sources of information
such as the Massey family, the police officers who had attended at sudden deaths and
Dr Reynolds herself. He did not know that information was available in the Forms B held
at the crematorium.
November 1998
14.8 A few weeks later, Mr Postles asked DISmith to provide further information about his
investigation and, in particular, the role played by the WPHA. DISmith wrote a second
report dated 9th November 1998, in which he recorded that:
103
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
(a) Mr Loader had provided 19 copy death certificates resulting from a search for all the
deaths certified by Shipman over a six-month period.
(b) DISmith had taken the certificates to ‘the Family Practitioners’, Hyde, and had
asked that the medical records for each of the 19 persons be examined to establish
whether the cause of death was consistent with the treatment and medication
recorded within the records. He said that ‘a couple’ of sets of records were not
available, as they were still with Shipman’s practice. Dr Banks had examined the
records over a number of days.
(c) He had returned to see Dr Banks, who told him that there did not appear to be any
discrepancies between the records and the causes of death and, although the
causes of death given by Shipman were of a ‘general nature’, there did not appear
to be cause for concern.
(d) He had told the Coroner of Dr Banks’ findings and had given him four other items of
information, namely: that the activities of Shipman were the subject of ‘innuendo and
gossip’; that each of the cremation forms had been countersigned by a second
doctor who had not raised any concerns about the deaths; that there was nothing to
indicate foul play from what was known of the circumstances of the deaths or the
discovery of the bodies, and that a variety of undertakers had been used.
(e) In view of the fact that ‘the information appeared to be based on innuendo and
gossip’, he had not thought it appropriate to approach the families of the deceased
persons, a decision with which the Coroner agreed.
14.9 Inote that DISmith did not then claim that he had received 20 certificates from Mr Loader,
as he was to tell the Inquiry. He gave the impression that 17 of the 19 sets of records had
been examined; in fact only 14 were examined before his meeting with Dr Banks. He did
not mention that Dr Banks had told him that there were some cases in which the
information in the medical records was insufficient to diagnose death or that Dr Banks
would have reported such deaths to the coroner. Again, he advanced the idea that the
report against Shipman was based on innuendo and gossip. In short, he sought to ‘play
down’ the seriousness of Dr Reynolds’ concerns and to exaggerate the extent to which his
investigations had provided real reassurance that all was well.
14.10 On 17th November 1998, Mr Postles sent DISmith’s two reports to Detective Chief
Superintendent (DCS) Anthony Keegan, Head of Crime Investigations. He attached a
copy of DISmith’s spreadsheet listing the 19 deaths and ending with the name of
Mrs Lily Higgins. The format of the spreadsheet had changed slightly since April 1998, in
that further columns had been added, but no information had been inserted into the new
columns. Mr Postles also enclosed a list of 11 further deaths which, it was said, the register
office had failed to identify at the time of DISmith’s original request. There was also a list
of seven deaths which Shipman had certified since the request was made; three of those
deaths had resulted in exhumations and murder charges. Mr Postles warned that there
may be some potential for criticism of the police in respect of the first investigation. He said
that he was not suggesting that the investigation was not completed as thoroughly as
possible, given the restrictions placed upon it. He merely wished to keep DCS Keegan
informed, because he thought that the Shipman case might well result in a public inquiry.
104
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
December 1998
14.11 DCS Keegan passed the reports and enclosures to Assistant Chief Constable (ACC)
David McCrone (now Deputy Chief Constable McCrone), who was then Head of Crime
Operations. According to a memorandum dated 8th December 1998, from DCS Keegan
to Mr Postles, ACC McCrone was satisfied that the actions of DISmith were ‘appropriate
at that time’. In view of the potential for criticism in the future, DCS Keegan suggested that
Mr Postles should liaise with the Coroner with a view to establishing ‘an agreed protocol/
press liaison strategy’ for use if necessary.
14.12 Thus it was that the GMP formed the view that the first investigation had been properly
conducted. DISmith was not to be criticised. Iaccept that, at this time, in December 1998,
the senior officers involved with the Shipman case were much occupied with the main
investigation and the failure of the first investigation was not their first priority. However, it
seems to me that it was inappropriate to make a decision of this kind on the basis of the
account of the one officer who, it appeared at that time, might be open to criticism. The
view formed in December 1998 was in fact based on deeply flawed information. DISmith’s
two reports were inaccurate and incomplete. In some respects they were untruthful. It
must be accepted that a senior police officer will not usually approach the report of a more
junior officer with suspicion that it is not honest. However, by this time, the GMP had good
reason to suspect that Shipman was indeed a serial killer and that the first police
investigation had failed to uncover him. They knew that the Force might face criticism in
this very serious matter. Yet, it appears that the decision that the first investigation was
‘appropriate at that time’ was made without any officer speaking to DISmith about the
issues that arose during the investigation or the ways in which DISmith tackled them and
reached his conclusions. No one, for example, ever asked him what he had done to find
out whether the death rate among Shipman’s patients (which was recorded in his
daybook) was, in fact, abnormal. In my judgement, this was a failure on the part of the
GMP. There should have been a more searching enquiry into the reasons why the first
investigation had failed to uncover any cause for suspicion. This should have taken place
in late 1998 or early 1999. The need for an early investigation should have been the more
obvious, as it was known that DISmith had not kept any proper record of what he had
done. Iaccept that the police had pressing concerns at this time but, nonetheless, the
failure of the first investigation should have been critically examined while events were
reasonably fresh in the minds of those involved.
The Police Decide to Record What Had Happened in March/April 1998
14.13 There matters rested until shortly after Shipman’s conviction. On 1st February 2000, the
Secretary of State for Health, The Rt. Hon. Alan Milburn, MP, announced that an Inquiry,
chaired by Lord Laming of Tewin, would be held into the Shipman affair. It was clear from
the announcement that the Terms of Reference of the Inquiry would include an
examination of the first, failed police investigation.
14.14 Assistant Chief Constable (ACC) Vincent Sweeney, then Head of the Crime Operations
Department, recognising that the conduct of the first investigation had not been properly
recorded, issued a written instruction that a factual account should be prepared. In that
105
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
document, he said that this should be ‘a comprehensive document recording, as
accurately as possible, the times and dates and content of all enquiries made,
supported wherever possible by documents’. The report should be in ‘‘story book’
format’ and should cover the investigation from beginning to end. Iobserve that it should
not have been necessary for the Force to begin finding out what had happened so long
after the event. ACC Sweeney said that the objective of this operation was ‘to ensure that
we are in a position to give a truthful and open account of our activities, and to
ensure that we are not confronted by any further surprise revelations/allegations’.
This reference to ‘further surprise revelations/allegations’ related to post-trial press
coverage of what was said to have happened during the first investigation. Among other
things, Dr Reynolds had made a statement to the press about her role in the first
investigation. Members of the Massey family had also told the press that they had
expressed concerns about the circumstances of the deaths of Shipman’s patients.
14.15 In his instruction, ACC Sweeney listed a number of points to be covered, based on
allegations which had recently been aired in the media. They included the following
issues:
(a) Whether or not Dr Reynolds had told DISmith that she and her partners had
calculated that the patients of Shipman were three times more likely to die than if they
had been patients of the Brooke Practice.
(b) Whether or not Dr Reynolds had told DISmith that she suspected that Shipman was
killing his patients and whether or not she had said that the local undertaker could
‘corroborate’ this suggestion.
(c) Whether or not, when DISmith had visited Dr Reynolds to tell her the result of his
investigation, she had ‘made one last attempt to convince him’ by inviting him to
go to the mortuary where two bodies of Shipman’s patients lay.
(d) Whether or not DISmith had asked Dr Reynolds if she had a problem working with
male doctors.
(e) Whether or not Dr Reynolds had identified Masseys as the relevant firm of
undertakers and, if not, how they had been identified.
(f) Which members of the Massey family had been spoken to and what had they said?
Also, whether or not any statements had been taken from them or any other person
and whether any documentation had been prepared.
(g) Whether or not Dr Reynolds or anyone else had identified any other potential
witnesses.
(h) What enquiries had been made with reference to death certificates and in respect
of cross-referencing of medical records? What were the agencies (presumably the
register office and Health Authority) asked to do?
(i) What flaws were revealed during the second investigation in respect of information
given during the first investigation and how were those flaws revealed?
106
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
(j) What background checks (criminal or professional) were made on Shipman during
the first investigation?
(k) What was said at the conclusion of the investigation when DISmith was briefing
CS Sykes and the Coroner?
14.16 ACC Sweeney concluded by assuring those involved that the task was not to be a ‘witch
hunt’ but a ‘collation of facts’ to enable the police to prepare for the questions they would
be asked by the Laming Inquiry. The objective was ‘to find the truth and not to criticise
individuals’. He concluded:
‘If we have failed to do something then let us simply say that we have
failed to do it and not cover anything up– we must be absolutely truthful
in everything we say and only in this way can we learn from the findings
of the Enquiry [sic] and play our role in ensuring that practices and
procedures are changed so that the chances of such an occurrence
happening again are minimised.’
14.17 In oral evidence, ACC Sweeney said that his request for a report in ‘‘story book’ format’
was not intended to preclude observations by the writer on the adequacy of the first
investigation. He wanted the Force to learn from any mistakes that had been made. He
wanted officers (in particular, DISmith) to be open about their involvement and not to feel
inhibited by the fear of disciplinary proceedings. Police Regulations provide that, before
any police officer is questioned about a matter that might lead to disciplinary proceedings,
s/he must be warned that s/he need not answer the questions. ACC Sweeney said that the
job of the officer assigned to the task of writing the report would have been impossible if
senior officers had contemplated disciplinary proceedings against those involved.
Although DISmith had been given no categoric assurance that he would not be
disciplined, there was at the time no suggestion that he had acted other than in good faith.
There was therefore no immediate prospect of disciplinary action being taken against him.
However, ACC Sweeney said that, if the investigation had found evidence of gross
professional misconduct or wilful neglect, senior officers would have had to reconsider
their views about the need for disciplinary proceedings.
14.18 There was to be a necessary limitation on the thoroughness of the exercise. ACC Sweeney
directed that only police officers should be questioned. Any approach to a witness outside
the Force might amount to an interference with the processes of the Laming Inquiry. I
observe that this limitation would not have been necessary had the police carried out an
investigation a year earlier.
14.19 The intention of ACC Sweeney, as expressed in this document, was entirely creditable.
However, by this time, the GMP knew that their first investigation had failed to detect a
serial killer and they were aware, from the media, of allegations that DISmith had failed to
follow up leads and information given to him in March 1998. Although Iaccept that senior
officers would not normally suspect that an officer’s report on an investigation would be
seriously inaccurate, allegations were being made in the media which were implicitly
inconsistent with DISmith’s account. The Force was on notice that DISmith’s account
might not be true. It was known that DI Smith had not made any notes of what he had done
107
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
and had prepared no final report. It must have been known that CS Sykes had not asked
for one. Yet, the senior officers in the Force still did not instigate a thorough and probing
investigation into the conduct of the March 1998 investigation.
14.20 Detective Superintendent Ellis, who was instructed to prepare the report, said that he did
not consider himself to be charged with the task of an investigation. Moreover, it was made
plain to him that he need not warn the officers whose accounts were to be recorded that
they might face disciplinary proceedings. It is plain that disciplinary proceedings had
been effectively ruled out before the process began. For one thing, a detective
superintendent would not be a suitable rank of officer to undertake a disciplinary inquiry
into CS Sykes.
The Ellis Report
14.21 On 21st February 2000, Det Supt Ellis received instructions to prepare a written narrative
of the first investigation. He understood that his task was to prepare an account of the
facts, to assist the future independent Inquiry. He told this Inquiry that he ‘was not to
comment or criticise in any way, shape or form’ DISmith’s investigation but was rather to
present to the Laming Inquiry DI Smith’s viewpoint of that investigation. Det Supt Ellis was
aware of ACC Sweeney’s memorandum, in which he spoke of his wish for openness and
the need for the Force to learn from mistakes. However, he was also aware that senior
officers in the Force had already reached the conclusion that DISmith’s investigation had
been properly conducted. This was to influence his approach to his task. For, as we shall
see, Det Supt Ellis did not confine himself to telling the story of the first investigation; he
was to write a justification of it. In a structured organisation such as a police force, it is
asking a great deal of a middle-ranking officer to take an independent approach to any
issue on which he already knows the views of those senior to him.
14.22 On 4th April, Det Supt Ellis interviewed CS Sykes; he made no notes of the interview,
because, he said, CS Sykes said ‘very little’. On 5th April, he interviewed DISmith; the
interview was noted in longhand but not recorded. He had prepared a checklist of issues
to be covered. He invited DISmith to give his own account of what he had done. When
that was complete, Det Supt Ellis went through the checklist to ensure that all topics had
been covered. He did not challenge or probe DISmith’s account in any way.
14.23 Ihave already said that the oral evidence which DISmith gave to the Inquiry was different
in some important respects from accounts given by him on earlier occasions, including
that given to Det Supt Ellis. There are also some important differences between what
DISmith had said in his reports of August and November 1998 and what he told Det Supt
Ellis. Ido not propose to set out every detail of what DISmith told Det Supt Ellis. The most
significant features were as follows:
(a) DISmith told Det Supt Ellis that the Coroner had told him and CS Sykes that
Dr Reynolds had explained that the patient base of the Brooke Practice was 9500
and there had been 14 deaths in the practice during the previous three months. In
that period, Shipman had had 16 deaths in his practice. However, DISmith
maintained that at no time had Dr Reynolds suggested that she and her partners had
108
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
done some calculations which showed that Shipman’s patients were three times
more likely to die than those of the Brooke Practice. It does not appear that Det Supt
Ellis asked whether or not DISmith had found out how many patients Shipman had.
There was no discussion in the report of the significance of the death rates. Idraw
attention to the fact that Det Supt Ellis was not aware that DISmith had failed to
mention the death rate, as one of the grounds of Dr Reynolds’ concern, in his report
of August 1998. Neither that report nor the report of November 1998 had been made
available to Det Supt Ellis. He told the Inquiry that he was not aware of their existence.
(b) DISmith went on to tell Det Supt Ellis that, when he saw Dr Reynolds, she told him
that she did not know whether she was doing the right thing. Since her arrival in Hyde,
there had been banter within the practice about Shipman providing pocket money
by asking for signatures on cremation certificates. Det Supt Ellis noted that the
suggestion that the issue of cremation certificates had been the subject of a joke was
contrary to what one of Dr Reynolds’ former colleagues, Dr Patel, was reported in the
media to have said, namely that doctors from the Brooke Practice were concerned
about Shipman’s activities. DISmith told Det Supt Ellis that it was clear to him that
Dr Reynolds was acting alone in making a report to the Coroner and did not have the
support of her colleagues. He reported that, so far as he was aware, those
colleagues were still signing cremation certificates for Shipman. When asked
whether he had requested to speak directly to any of Dr Reynolds’ colleagues,
DISmith replied that he had not but added that she had not offered to make them
available. She had not mentioned them by name.
(c) DISmith also told Det Supt Ellis that Dr Reynolds’ concerns related to ‘alleged
features’ of the deaths of some of Shipman’s patients who were mainly female, were
discovered dead by Shipman and were wearing day clothes when found. There was
no discussion between Det Supt Ellis and DISmith about the significance or unusual
nature of these features. The majority of the deceased appeared to have been
cremated. DISmith went on to say that Dr Reynolds had consulted the Coroner, after
speaking to an undertaker who had similar concerns. She refused to identify the
undertaker; this latter observation appears in Det Supt Ellis’ report in capital letters,
as if to give it particular significance.
(d) Dr Reynolds had not produced any documentary evidence. It does not appear that
DISmith was asked what documentary evidence she might have had, nor whether
he had asked her to provide such evidence.
(e) When asked directly by Det Supt Ellis, DISmith stated that Dr Reynolds had at no time
said that she suspected that Shipman was killing his patients. This was, of course, in
contrast to his oral evidence to the Inquiry.
(f) DISmith said that, after seeing Dr Reynolds, he sought production of the death
certificates of Shipman’s patients who had died in the previous six months. Two days
later, he was given ‘ten to twelve’ certificates and, a few days later, Mr Loader
produced several more, making 19 in all. He made a chart on the computer from
information contained within the certificates. With the certificates, he went to the
crematorium and found out which patients had been buried and which cremated.
109
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
Of the 19 deaths, 16 were followed by cremation and three by burial. This did not
contrast sharply with the local average of 70% cremation to 30% burial. DISmith said
that he found out the identities of ‘undertakers’, by which he presumably meant the
undertakers dealing with the 19 deaths. He entered the information on his chart.
(g) DI Smith said that he searched the GMPICS ‘Incident Handling’ to establish whether
there had been any police involvement in the deaths that he was investigating. He
had found three entries but these were not helpful. He was not asked whether he had
done a check on the computer archive or whether he had spoken to the officers who
attended the scenes of death.
(h) DI Smith said that he had checked the GMPICS Operational Information System but
had found no relevant information about Shipman. He had not made any other check
to discover whether Shipman had previous convictions. He was not asked why he
had not checked the PNC.
(i) DISmith said that he attended at the WPHA premises and asked Dr Banks and
Mrs Parkinson for access to the records of the patients whose death certificates he
had. He claimed that, for reasons of confidentiality, he had not told them anything of
the nature of his enquiries, not even, in the first instance, that they involved Shipman.
(This was not so, as Mrs Parkinson’s note later revealed.) He told Det Supt Ellis that
they agreed to research his request and contact him.
(j) DISmith related how, on his return to the Health Authority premises a few days later,
it emerged that Dr Banks and Mrs Parkinson had realised that all the records related
to patients of Shipman and there was then a discussion about Shipman’s style of
practice; he was said to be an old-fashioned doctor who would visit patients
unannounced. At this meeting, DISmith also learned for the first time, he said, about
the scanner appeal. (This was quite wrong, as the Coroner’s note of 25th March has
revealed.) On this second visit, some of the medical records were now available.
DISmith claimed that, there and then, he asked Dr Banks to examine the records and
to tell him what the patients were being treated for, whether the treatment was
appropriate and whether the cause of death on the certificate was consistent with the
complaint. Most remarkably, DISmith told Det Supt Ellis that Dr Banks had already
made this examination and was ready to state his findings. (It does not appear that
Det Supt Ellis ever wondered how Dr Banks could have undertaken this task if all he
had known, until that moment, was that DISmith wanted to see the records of a list
of deceased patients. If he did, it does not seem that he asked DI Smith how he
thought Dr Banks had been able to do the job.) DISmith told Det Supt Ellis that
Dr Banks had found that all the causes of death were associated with old age and
that he was happy with the records; nothing stood out as untoward. Dr Banks
commented that Shipman’s use of drugs was ‘on high side’ but nothing gave him
concern. He did not mention that Dr Banks had said that he would have reported two
of the deaths to the Coroner.
(k) DISmith claimed that he had returned to the Health Authority on a further occasion
about a week later, when more records had been found and examined. This time he
110
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
spoke to a woman doctor. Nothing untoward had been found. (It is now known that
this visit did not take place.)
(l) Meanwhile, DISmith had discovered from Police Constable Napier the identity of the
unknown undertaker. He said that he went to see ‘Debbie Massey’. Her husband
and father were present. The handwritten note prepared at the interview records that
DISmith claimed that, when confronted by him, Mrs Bambroffe and her father said
that the concerns she had expressed were ‘just gossip’. They had laughed and joked
about it. It was coincidence. DI Smith maintained that, despite being ‘pushed’ by
him, Mrs Bambroffe had produced nothing of evidential value. (Iobserve that this
account was a travesty of the truth, although Det Supt Ellis was not to know that.)
(m) DISmith said that he had briefed Mr Pollard fully about his enquiries. He suggested
to the Coroner that they might wait until another body was available and ‘secure’ it
for pathology, or that they might approach the families of deceased persons but, he
said, the Coroner did not want that. (Ihave already found that DISmith did not make
such a suggestion.)
(n) DISmith said that he revisited Dr Reynolds and briefed her fully. He suggested that
nothing further could be done other than intervention at the ‘next death’. She
seemed disappointed.
(o) In response to a specific question from Det Supt Ellis, DI Smith said that Dr Reynolds
had not at any time invited him to examine bodies available at the mortuary. This was
a reference to the allegation, which had appeared in the press, that Dr Reynolds
had told DISmith that there were two bodies available for autopsy. (In fact, as I
have found, Dr Reynolds did tell DISmith, on 24th March 1998, that there were two
bodies available for examination. They were those of Mrs Lily Higgins and
Miss Ada Warburton. The bodies were not at the mortuary, but at the premises of
funeral directors.) Det Supt Ellis added that subsequent investigation had
demonstrated that there was never a time when two bodies of Shipman’s former
patients had been at the mortuary at the same time. This is the only occasion on
which it appears that any attempt was made to cross-check what DISmith had said.
(p) DISmith had not made any record of his investigation, other than the notes in his
daybook and the information entered on the spreadsheet. Nor had he prepared a
written report. CS Sykes had not asked him to do so and Mr Pollard had been content
with an oral report. Indeed the suggestion seemed to be that CS Sykes believed that
the requirement for a report would in some way breach the confidentiality of the
investigation.
14.24 Pausing there, by this stage, Det Supt Ellis had fulfilled his instruction to provide a ‘‘story
book’ format’ report of the first investigation. Had he stopped there, Iwould not have
criticised him. He had recorded the account of DISmith in some detail and that of
CS Sykes very briefly. He had not challenged or probed these accounts and, save in one
respect, he had not cross-checked with other sources of information. He had not made
use of the information available to him on the HOLMES police computer database, which
contained a huge store of information about the later Shipman investigation. His report
111
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
would therefore be of very limited use. However, he had not been given clear instructions
to challenge or probe the accounts and he understood that he was not to investigate any
possible disciplinary offences.
14.25 However, Det Supt Ellis did not stop there. He embarked upon a series of
‘OBSERVATIONS’. First, he noted what he called the ‘unique’ nature of this ‘highly
sensitive’ investigation. He observed that the police investigation had been handicapped
by Dr Reynolds’ insistence on anonymity and by the Coroner’s insistence that Shipman
should not become aware of it. He remarked that the handicap was exacerbated by
Dr Reynolds’ refusal or conscious decision not to identify potential witnesses. That
comment was not justified on the evidence before him. The only witness whom
Dr Reynolds had declined to identify (at her specific request) was Mrs Bambroffe. DISmith
had discovered Mrs Bambroffe’s identity, but had failed to ask her any relevant questions.
He had also failed to ask if he could speak to Dr Reynolds’ partners. Icannot think of any
other witness whom Det Supt Ellis might have had in mind.
14.26 Det Supt Ellis then went on to pose the question ‘whether the initial police investigation
was as thorough as possible’. He had not been asked to deal with this issue, although
ACC Sweeney said that he did not intend him to be precluded from doing so. However,
if the issue was to be addressed, it should have been dealt with fairly and objectively. It
was not.
14.27 Det Supt Ellis first excused DISmith’s failure to check the PNC and discover Shipman’s
previous convictions. He said that this was excusable because, at the time, it was
unthinkable that a doctor might deliberately kill his patients. No other officer in the GMP
sought to support that view. CS Sykes was reluctant to criticise DISmith in this respect
but eventually agreed that the check should have been made. The flaw in Det Supt Ellis’
reasoning is so obvious, that Ifind it amazing that the report was not sent back for
amendment, as soon as it had been seen by a senior officer. The reasoning seems to
be that DISmith was investigating an allegation that could not be true; therefore there
was no need to do it thoroughly. If the police are asked to investigate an excess of
deaths in unusual circumstances among the patients of a particular doctor, it must be
because it is suspected that he might be harming them. The fact that the allegation is
most unusual cannot be an excuse for not carrying out a routine (and important) part
of any criminal investigation. Inote, also, that Det Supt Ellis had not established why
DISmith had not checked for previous convictions. He told the Inquiry that he had
forgotten to do so. It appears that Det Supt Ellis understood that DI Smith had
consciously decided not to do so.
14.28 Det Supt Ellis then embarked upon an indictment of Dr Reynolds. He catalogued her
supposed failures. She had not told DISmith about the comparative death rates. (This was
a manifestly unjustified accusation because DISmith certainly knew of the figures; they
were in his daybook.) She had not said that she thought he might be murdering his
patients. (She had.) She had not identified the female undertaker. Her claim (as reported
in the media) that she had told DISmith of two bodies available for autopsy was untrue.
She had given him no documentary evidence and had identified no potential witnesses.
Her bona fides were questioned; it had been claimed in the media that she and her
112
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
partners were discussing their concerns for some time before she made her report to the
Coroner; yet, Det Supt Ellis noted, she herself had continued to sign cremation certificates
until 17th March 1998 and her partners were signing them during the first investigation.
What this list of failures implied was that Dr Reynolds had made a report and had then
failed to co-operate with the investigation or to act in a manner consistent with her
concerns. Iaccept that Det Supt Ellis had received a grossly misleading account of the
part played by Dr Reynolds. However, he had reached conclusions critical of Dr Reynolds
without once querying the account he had been given.
14.29 Det Supt Ellis observed that the Masseys had offered nothing to progress the enquiry.
Indeed they had not; they had had little opportunity to do so. However, Det Supt Ellis
accepted, without question, DISmith’s claim that Mrs Bambroffe had said it was all gossip
and a joke, which was, as Ihave said, a travesty of the truth.
14.30 Det Supt Ellis observed that the register office had failed to provide a complete bundle
of death certificates for the six-month period. However, he did not suggest that this
failure had had an adverse effect on the investigation. He said only that it was difficult
to see how the true figure could have influenced the officer, given the constraints of the
investigation. In oral evidence, he said that it appeared to him that DI Smith had not
understood or explored the significance of the number of deaths; therefore, it would not
have made any difference to his investigation even if he had discovered the true number
of deaths. If that was his reasoning, which I doubt, it is surprising that he did not explain
it in his report. It would have been in sharp contrast to his otherwise bland acceptance
that DISmith had done a perfectly acceptable job. Ithink it far more likely that he meant
that, as DISmith could not interview the relatives of the 19 deceased patients of whom
he knew, it would not have helped to know that there were in fact 31 patients of Shipman
who had died in the previous six months. He still would not have been able to interview
the relatives.
14.31 Without further comment or justification, Det Supt Ellis observed that DISmith could have
acted in no other way than to accept the findings of Dr Banks. In oral evidence, he
accepted that he did not have the necessary information to advance an opinion in those
strong terms. He also agreed that he had reached conclusions without making any critical
analysis of the information he had received. In his report, he concluded that the
investigation conducted by DISmith was ‘appropriate at the time’. (Inote that this was
precisely the expression used in DCS Keegan’s memorandum of 8th December 1998, a
document which Det Supt Ellis had seen. Det Supt Ellis agreed that he was heavily
influenced by the views expressed earlier by senior officers.) He went on to say that
‘criticism could be levelled’ at the organisation in respect of DISmith’s failure to keep
records and observed that this might give rise to difficulties at the forthcoming Inquiry. This
was similar to the observation made in December 1998 in the correspondence between
DCS Keegan and Mr Postles. He moderated his criticism of DISmith’s failure to keep
records by suggesting that written records might have been kept if any evidence
supporting the suspicions had come to light.
14.32 This report was accepted without criticism by senior officers in the GMP. ACC Sweeney
told the Inquiry that it was ‘reassuring’ in that it contained no surprises. It remained the
113
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
official view of the Force that the first investigation had been ‘appropriate at the time’. It
appears that senior officers felt that the investigation had been hampered by two
particular difficulties, the need for confidentiality and what came to be known as ‘the
credibility gap’. Yet, on examination, neither of these amounted to an explanation, let alone
an excuse, for the failure of the investigation.
14.33 The need for confidentiality imposed on the investigating officer limitations that would not
usually apply in a murder investigation. DISmith could not, as would be usual practice,
interview and take statements from the relatives and neighbours of the people whose
deaths had given rise to concern. But that was known from the start and, as has now been
recognised, there were many lines of enquiry that could have been pursued, with success
and without loss of confidentiality, if only the officers involved had thought of them. Even
those enquiries that DISmith did think of, he did not pursue thoroughly.
14.34 By ‘the credibility gap’, the officers of the GMP meant the difficulty that they had in
accepting that it was possible that a doctor, particularly one as well-respected as
Shipman, might deliberately kill his patients. Iaccept the general proposition. For a
person, such as Mr Alan Massey, with no professional responsibility to investigate any
suspicions brought to his attention, Iaccept that the difficulty would be very great
indeed. Mrs Angela Woodruff spoke of the same difficulty; Iquoted from her views in
Chapter One of this Report. However, a police officer charged with an investigation
cannot perform his professional duty unless he is able to set aside these difficulties and
open his mind to the possibility that the incredible allegation might be true. Mr Postles
spoke of his own difficulty in believing that Shipman might have killed a large number
of patients. He said that he remained in doubt even until the trial began. That may be
so, but his incredulity did not prevent him from conducting a thorough and searching
investigation.
14.35 Iaccept that the police will sometimes be faced by allegations of an incredible nature
from a source in which they do not have much confidence. That is bound to affect the
vigour with which any investigation is conducted. The Inquiry was always anxious to
discover whether DISmith or CS Sykes had ever regarded Dr Reynolds as an unreliable
source. They denied it. If those denials are true, then the fact that she was raising
concerns of a very serious nature imposed on them a duty to investigate thoroughly and
with an open mind. If, on the other hand, they thought she was unreliable or malicious
or had ‘a bee in her bonnet’, then it would be understandable if they failed to open their
minds to the idea that Shipman might be a serial killer. But, in my view, the police cannot,
at the same time, claim that they regarded Dr Reynolds as a sensible professional
woman with genuine concerns and rely on the ‘credibility gap’ to excuse the inadequacy
of their work.
14.36 It appeared to be the intention of the Force that the Ellis report would form the basis of the
GMP’s case to the Laming Inquiry. ACC Sweeney told the Inquiry that the police saw the
Ellis report as ‘the beginning of a process of gathering information’, a process which
foundered with the end of the Laming Inquiry. Whatever the earlier intentions, no further
investigative work was done.
114
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
The Evidence Initially Submitted to the Shipman Inquiry
14.37 The Shipman Inquiry was set up in January 2001, following judicial review proceedings of
the Secretary of State’s decision to convene the Laming Inquiry, which was to sit in private.
On 6th February 2001, in response to a request from Mr Campbell Kennedy, then the
Solicitor to the Inquiry, the GMP provided copies of various documents including the Ellis
report. In May 2001, I announced that the Inquiry would be conducted in phases, the first
of which would be devoted to an investigation into which and how many patients Shipman
had killed and that the first police investigation would be examined as part of Phase Two.
In December 2001, Iannounced that Ihoped that the hearings relating to the first police
investigation would begin in May 2002. During the second half of 2001, the GMP and
DISmith submitted witness statements, the thrust of which was that DI Smith’s
investigation had been thorough, given the information available at the time, but had been
hampered by the need for confidentiality. The Inquiry received no indication that the Ellis
report did not represent the views of senior officers in the Force.
14.38 In March 2002, the Inquiry released to participants the CD-ROM containing the statements
and documentary evidence to be relied on during the hearings in relation to the first police
investigation. Meanwhile, the GMP had submitted to the Inquiry a witness statement,
dated 19th February 2002, from Detective Chief Superintendent Stelfox. This dealt
specifically with a series of questions posed in a letter from Miss Ita Langan, Deputy
Solicitor to the Inquiry; those questions were designed to discover the rules of best
practice in respect of note taking and record keeping in the course of a police
investigation. DCS Stelfox provided a helpful account with references to the Code of
Practice made under Section 23 of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996,
which came into force on 1st April 1997. DCS Stelfox later submitted a second statement
to the Inquiry, dated 26th April 2002, in which he accepted that the Code applied to the
March 1998 investigation and that the failure of DISmith to keep adequate records
amounted to a breach of the Code. He also expressed the view that the preparation of a
written report at the conclusion of the investigation, although not required under the Code,
would have been good practice. He pointed out that responsibility for setting the
requirement for a final report, and for specifying the form in which it should be provided,
had lain with CS Sykes.
The Stelfox Report
14.39 On 23rd April 2002, barely two weeks before the Inquiry hearings were due to begin,
DCS Stelfox was instructed to undertake a complete and fundamental review of the
conduct of the March 1998 investigation. He had not completed it when the hearings
began on 7th May. Nonetheless, his findings were such that, when called upon to make an
opening statement to the Inquiry, Mr Michael Shorrock QC, on behalf of the GMP, admitted
that the first police investigation into Shipman had been seriously flawed. In particular, he
said that the strategic management of the investigation had been flawed ‘due to the lack
of clarity of ownership of the investigation’. By that, he meant that it had not been clear
whether the investigation had been conducted on behalf of the police or on behalf of the
Coroner. Mr Shorrock also said that the investigation was flawed ‘due to the lack of agreed
criteria or aims and the failure to outline clear reporting mechanisms’. He continued by
115
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
accepting that collection of available information had been incomplete and not fully
recorded. The interpretation of such information as had been gathered had been flawed.
That was partly due to the fact that the police themselves had been provided with
information which was incomplete or flawed. He accepted that there had been a failure to
recognise that various pieces of information tended to support Dr Reynolds’ suspicions.
However, the lack of a strategic framework had, he said, deprived those conducting the
investigation of a mechanism for deciding whether further and wider enquiries should
have been undertaken. The investigation had terminated prematurely. Mr Shorrock
declared that it was by no means certain that, if it had continued, lives would have been
saved. On behalf of the GMP, he asserted the Force’s determination to learn from their
mistakes and to deal thoroughly and impartially with any complaints. He reminded the
public of the skill and professionalism with which the later, successful investigation into
Shipman had been conducted. He concluded by expressing the Force’s deepest regrets
to the families and friends of the victims who died at Shipman’s hands.
14.40 Ithanked Mr Shorrock and the GMP for the openness of those admissions, which had
come as a complete surprise to me and the Inquiry team. I observed that it appeared that
there must be some documents which had not yet been disclosed to the Inquiry. When
DCS Stelfox’s report became available (it is dated 15th May and was submitted to the
Inquiry soon afterwards), it was found to be a careful, detailed, objective analysis of the
evidence then available in respect of the first investigation. The report recognised that
there were some issues on which the position would remain incomplete until oral evidence
was heard. On the basis of the evidence already available, DCS Stelfox was deeply critical
of DISmith for his conduct of the investigation and of CS Sykes for his failure properly to
direct and supervise it.
14.41 DCS Stelfox followed the evidence given at the Inquiry and, when he came to give oral
evidence on 11th June, he said that his views had changed very little. He remained deeply
critical of the first investigation.
14.42 Ido not propose to set out DCS Stelfox’s conclusions. They are broadly compatible with
my own conclusions, save in one respect. DCS Stelfox was of the view that there had been
confusion about whether the investigation was a police investigation or was being
conducted on behalf of the Coroner. He thought that this had led to uncertainty about who
was in charge and was responsible for making decisions. Ido not agree that there was
any such confusion or uncertainty. CS Sykes, DISmith and Mr Pollard all thought this was
a police investigation. In my view, it clearly was. I do not think there was any doubt that
the police were in charge. CS Sykes was responsible for decisions but he delegated that
responsibility to DISmith. CS Sykes should not have taken charge because he did not
have the experience or expertise required for the task. Once in charge, he should not have
delegated responsibility for taking the decision to close the investigation.
14.43 The question arose as to why the police had waited until the eleventh hour before
undertaking the objective review eventually conducted by DCS Stelfox. It was claimed on
their behalf that they were unable to do so until they received the CD-ROM containing the
Inquiry’s evidence. It was argued that they could not embark on a thorough investigation
without having access to the evidence of witnesses. It would not have been proper, it was
116
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
said, for them to seek to interview witnesses while the Inquiry was proceeding. I accept
that it would not have been appropriate for them to have approached witnesses such as
members of the Massey family, the doctors of the Brooke Practice or the Coroner. Had
they asked permission to do so, Iwould have refused. There would have been a danger
that a witness might be influenced by police questioning. However, Ido not accept that
the GMP could not have done a great deal more to investigate their own shortcomings
than they did. Indeed, DCS Stelfox agreed that that was so. They could have probed
DISmith’s various accounts of events, which were riddled with inconsistencies and
improbabilities. They could have questioned him closely about his approach to the issue
of numbers of deaths and the comparative death rates. It would have been immediately
apparent that he had done nothing about them and had not understood their significance.
Yet he had told no one of his difficulty. They could have found out that he had never
realised that the bundle of copy death certificates he had been given was incomplete and
that he had never asked Dr Reynolds whether or not she had any documentary evidence
in support of her figures. They could have found out that he had not asked either
Dr Reynolds or any of the Brooke Practice doctors about the individual deaths about which
they were concerned. They could have asked him why he had not spoken to the Brooke
Practice doctors. They could have quizzed him about how the names of Mrs Lily Higgins
and Miss Ada Warburton came to be in his daybook, apparently at a time when the bodies
of those patients had not yet been cremated. They could have asked him what questions
he had asked Mrs Bambroffe and whether they included questions about the particular
deaths she had had in mind when she shared her concerns with Dr Reynolds. They could
have discovered the nature of the documentation which would have been available to him,
such as cremation forms. They could have examined their own HOLMES database. They
did none of these things. For over three years, from late 1998 until April 2002, they
accepted DISmith’s own account and subjected it to no critical analysis whatsoever.
Findings
14.44 In my view, the GMP ought to have undertaken a searching enquiry into why their
investigation had failed. They well knew that three lives might have been lost as the result
of that failure.
14.45 Iregret to say that Ihave been driven to the conclusion that, had it not been for the
Shipman Inquiry, the GMP would never have made any more thorough enquiry into this
matter than had been carried out by Det Supt Ellis. They submitted his report to this Inquiry
without expressing any reservations about its conclusions. Until a very late stage, their
stance was that DISmith’s investigation had been as thorough as was possible in the
circumstances. Ifear that the truth might not have emerged at all if the Shipman Inquiry
had not been set up. The Laming Inquiry did not have the extensive investigative
resources that enabled this Inquiry to uncover the evidence that has revealed the
untruthfulness of DISmith’s account.
14.46 That said, once DCS Stelfox had investigated, the GMP accepted his conclusion without
reservation. The conduct of the hearings on their behalf was entirely proper and at no
stage did they seek to defend that which had occurred. They raised points in mitigation of
their failures but only to a realistic extent.
117
SHIP02$$20 09-04-03 21:40:41 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P014 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
14.47 There is a natural and understandable instinct in all individuals to seek to avoid criticism
if possible. In organisations, there is a natural tendency to close ranks for mutual selfprotection.
That these are natural instincts goes some way towards mitigating the gravity
of the failure of the GMP to face up to their shortcomings in respect of this investigation at
an earlier stage.
118
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: SO ProofRound: 3
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
An Analysis of Dr Banks’ Role
Finding a Benchmark
15.1 It is necessary now to revert to the contribution of Dr Banks to the police investigation and
to make a more detailed and critical examination of his review of the medical records.
15.2 When it appeared that it would be necessary for me to assess the adequacy of Dr Banks’
examination of the medical records of Shipman’s deceased patients and the
reasonableness of his conclusions, it was decided that I should be given some
benchmark by which to judge him. The Inquiry sought the assistance of Dr Frances
Cranfield, a general practitioner of about 20 years’ experience. On the face of it, her
professional experience as a general practitioner seemed comparable to that of Dr Banks.
She was asked to consider the same records as had been examined by Dr Banks in March
1998. She was told what background information Dr Banks had received (that is the
information from Mrs Parkinson’s note) and was asked to advise as to the adequacy or
otherwise of Dr Banks’ review and whether his apparent conclusions were reasonable and
consistent with his professional duty in the circumstances. In evidence, Dr Cranfield said
that she tried to approach her task, putting from her mind her knowledge that Shipman had
been convicted of murdering his patients. If she had had only the background knowledge
available to Dr Banks, she would have examined the records for signs of gross
mismanagement, rather than criminality, although the presence of the police and the
mention of donations to a fund might mean that she would have had the possibility of
criminal behaviour in the back of her mind.
15.3 Unfortunately, no limit was imposed on the time Dr Cranfield was to spend on this task. It
was not known at that time that Dr Banks had spent only five hours on his review. In the
event, Dr Cranfield spent about 45 hours on the task and produced a very detailed
analysis of what the records revealed. Simply on account of the time taken for the task, it
would not have been fair for me to compare the results of her work with that of Dr Banks.
However, further reasons emerged why I could not use her work as a yardstick by which
to judge Dr Banks. She had undertaken some training in forensic medicine; she had
acquired considerable experience as an expert witness and had a good deal of practice
in writing reports.
15.4 For those reasons, it would be unfair for me to judge Dr Banks’ work against that of
Dr Cranfield. Accordingly, I shall not lengthen this Report by undertaking a review of her
findings. Suffice it to say that I found her report and evidence most illuminating. She
demonstrated very clearly that, if the police had instructed an expert of her calibre and
expertise to examine the records in March 1998, they would have been advised that there
were substantial reasons for concern about Shipman’s conduct. Dr Cranfield observed
many worrying features of Shipman’s records. I mention only one in detail. She
recognised, from the records, that several of Shipman’s patients appeared to have been
found dead, not long after he had visited them, and that he had apparently left them alone,
not anticipating that they were about to die. Yet, when they died suddenly and
unexpectedly later that day, Shipman was prepared to certify the cause of death and not
119
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
to refer the deaths to the coroner. That trend of sudden death shortly after a visit would
have caused Dr Cranfield to think that Shipman’s treatment of his patients was
substandard. After looking at the tranche of cases which Dr Banks had seen, she said she
would have suspected criminal behaviour in the form of gross negligence. In fact, she
went on to examine more cases and these would have caused her to take an even more
serious view. Had Dr Cranfield reviewed the medical records which Dr Banks saw, the
outcome of the first investigation might well have been very different. That observation is
not necessarily intended as a criticism of DI Smith’s decision to accept assistance from
Dr Banks, at least in the first instance.
15.5 The Inquiry also received a report written by Dr Nina Moorman, a general practitioner and
formerly a part-time medical adviser to a health authority. In 2000, Dr Moorman had been
asked, in connection with the WPHA’s proposed disciplinary proceedings against
Dr Banks, to review the 15 sets of medical records which Dr Banks had examined in March
1998. She had concluded that Dr Banks’ review of the records was perfectly satisfactory,
given the circumstances in which he was asked to undertake the task. Partly as a result of
that opinion, the Health Authority discontinued the disciplinary proceedings.
15.6 Examination of a chart prepared by Dr Moorman revealed that she had noted that, in five
of the 14 deaths, the situation revealed by the records suggested that the death should
have been reported to the coroner. Yet she knew that Shipman had made no such report.
To be fair, she did not know whether Shipman might have ‘discussed’ the death with the
coroner and received ‘permission’ to issue the MCCD. However, she dealt with this issue
in her report by saying that Dr Banks should not be criticised for any lack of care because,
in her view, ‘he did express concerns about a number of deaths to the Police and this
might have been given more weight in the investigation by the Coroner, which
appears to have been under consideration until 21 May 1998’. It is a matter of concern
to me, although I do not think that this occurred to the WPHA or those advising them, that,
in giving her opinion, Dr Moorman went beyond her proper function as an expert and
descended into the arena as an advocate for Dr Banks. It was for her to advise on what
the records should have revealed to a medical adviser applying himself with reasonable
skill and care to the task in hand. She could also properly have indicated the degree of
concern which the records would have raised in her mind and the terms in which a
reasonable medical adviser would have reported to the police. It would then have been
for others to compare Dr Banks’ actual performance with what she had said was
reasonable. Many professional people, asked to express an expert view, do not fully
understand the purpose and limitations of expert evidence.
15.7 Notwithstanding the shortcomings of Dr Moorman’s report, the Inquiry decided to call her
to give evidence. When the Inquiry received Dr Cranfield’s report and found that she was
critical of Dr Banks, it was thought that, in fairness to Dr Banks, an expert who was known
to be supportive of him should also be called. When Dr Moorman gave evidence to the
Inquiry, she accepted that, apart from the five cases she had identified which should in
her view have been reported to the coroner, there were other features revealed by the
records which gave rise to concern. She agreed that it was a cause for concern that, in
seven of the 14 cases, the death appeared to occur soon after a visit by Shipman at which
he had not recorded in the notes any indication that the patient was seriously ill. She
120
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
agreed that, if Dr Banks had noticed this feature, he should have mentioned it to the police.
She said that it would also have been appropriate for Dr Banks to raise these concerns
with Shipman on a case-by-case basis. She then added that it was her belief that he had
done so. This confirms me in my view that Dr Moorman did not understand the limitations
of the expert’s role. Once again, she had gone beyond her remit and had taken up
Dr Banks’ cause.
15.8 I was unable to accept the opinion advanced in Dr Moorman’s written report. That part of
her oral evidence which consisted of true expert opinion tended to suggest that there were
features to be noted in the records which should have been mentioned to the police.
15.9 It follows that, despite the Inquiry team’s best efforts, I was left to make my own judgement
of Dr Banks. Fortunately, despite some uncertainty about his ability to give evidence on
account of recent ill health, Dr Banks was able to face detailed questioning about his
examination of the medical records. My conclusions are based almost entirely upon
admissions made by him and necessary inferences from his evidence.
Concerns about Shipman’s Failure to Report Deaths to the Coroner
15.10 Shortly before giving oral evidence, Dr Banks was asked to reconsider the medical
records he had first examined in March 1998. By this time, he had received the evidence
of Dr Cranfield. He prepared a final written statement. First, having made the point that he
had spent only five hours on the task and had not been able to read every single document
within the records, he helpfully identified those documents which, by reference to the
information recorded in his chart, he inferred he must have seen and examined at the time.
Second, he identified the deaths of Mrs Bertha Parr, Miss Mabel Shawcross,
Mrs Cissie Davies and Mrs Winifred Healey as deaths that ought to have been referred
to the coroner because there was insufficient information in the medical records to permit
adequate diagnosis of the cause of death. It should be noted that Dr Banks was not saying
that he personally would have reported these cases; he was saying that any reasonable
doctor would have reported them, at least if the only information available was that
recorded in the notes. As all relevant material ought to be recorded in the notes, it would
appear that, in each of these cases, there was cause for concern that not enough was
known about the case to permit an adequate diagnosis of the cause of death.
15.11 In his final written statement, Dr Banks also identified five other cases in which he said that
he personally would have reported the death to the coroner because he would not (on the
basis of the information contained in the available records) have been sufficiently sure of
the cause of death. However, he said that it would not have been universal practice to do
so. He said that he was uncertain whether or not he had mentioned these cases to DI Smith
but I am satisfied that he did not. These cases were those of Mr James King,
Mrs Norah Nuttall, Miss Muriel Harrison, Mrs Pamela Hillier and Mrs Joan Dean. He said
that these cases would not have caused him any concern in March 1998, as he would have
assumed either that the medical records were incomplete or that Shipman had additional
information, not recorded, from which a proper diagnosis could have been made. It
appears that Dr Banks’ approach to his task was affected by a readiness to find an
innocent explanation for anything that might give rise to concern.
121
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
15.12 It is to be noted that Dr Banks did not claim that, in March 1998, he had not had time to
examine the records so as to identify the four cases which should have been reported and
the five cases which he personally would have reported. He was suggesting that he had
in fact identified them. In three of the four cases, he said he believed that he had
mentioned them to DI Smith as being reportable.
15.13 When giving oral evidence, Dr Banks was taken through all the sets of medical records he
had examined in 1998. He stressed that, on the earlier occasion, he had not had time to
examine every document within the records or to cross-check that the information which
appeared on a summary card accurately reflected the detailed entries in the notes. I
accept that that was so and that it was a reasonable approach to the task, as he
understood it. He repeated that he had been asked to see whether the common features
were present and said that he also looked to see whether or not the medical history was
generally consistent with the cause of death as recorded by Shipman in the records. It
seems to me that, while five hours was not long enough to undertake an in-depth study, it
was sufficient to allow him to assess the adequacy of the information from which to
diagnose a cause of death and to look for common features. Dr Banks did not suggest the
contrary. In my view, in undertaking that limited review, he should also have had the time
and opportunity to notice any strikingly unusual features which might give rise to concern
of any kind. I did not understand Dr Banks to dissent from that. In any event, if Dr Banks
had felt that he required more time to perform the task he had been asked to undertake,
he could have asked for it.
15.14 Throughout his evidence, Dr Banks repeated that he had approached his task in the belief
that it was unthinkable that Shipman might have harmed his patients but that he had,
nonetheless, undertaken the work carefully.
15.15 I do not propose to lengthen this Report by a detailed consideration of each set of records
examined by Dr Banks and an analysis of his opinion about them. Suffice it to say that,
while giving oral evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Banks confirmed his view that there were four
cases which, he said, should definitely have been referred to the coroner and six (as
opposed to five) cases which he personally would have reported to the coroner, rather
than certify the cause of death himself. In addition to the five cases mentioned earlier, he
had identified another, that of Mrs Bianka Pomfret. However, he said that some doctors
would not take that view about those six cases and would be prepared to certify the cause
of death. Some doctors were much stricter than others about the circumstances in which
they were prepared to certify. Some coroners, he said, imposed more stringent rules than
others in respect of the cases that they required to be reported. I accept that this is so.
15.16 Dr Banks’ evidence about his attitude to Shipman’s failure to refer cases to the coroner
was inconsistent. At one stage, he said that he had not thought that Shipman’s failure to
refer cases to the coroner was a cause for concern. He himself had not practised as a
general practitioner in the Hyde area and did not know what the coroner expected. He also
thought he did not have access to all the information that had been available to Shipman.
He thought Shipman might have certified the cause of death because he wished to save
the relatives from the additional distress of an autopsy. He thought that he ought to give
Shipman some advice about his practice in relation to coroners’ referrals. He felt that
Shipman’s practice was lax but he did not regard this as a cause for concern.
122
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
15.17 Inconsistently, at another stage of his evidence, Dr Banks claimed that he believed he
would have been sufficiently concerned about Shipman’s failure to refer the most
obviously reportable deaths to the coroner that he would have mentioned the deaths to
DI Smith. I do not think he can have been as concerned as he claimed. If he had identified
and been concerned about the four cases which, he said, should definitely have been
reported to the coroner, I do not think he would have told Mrs Parkinson on Friday,
27th March 1998 (as, according to her note, he did) that there were ‘a couple of cases’
about which he was concerned. Dr Banks was anxious to persuade me that by ‘a couple
of cases’ he had meant ‘a few’. I think it unlikely, although not impossible, that
Mrs Parkinson would have written ‘a couple of cases’ if Dr Banks had used the expression
‘a few’. However, I find it hard to accept that Dr Banks would have used the expression ‘a
couple’ or even ‘a few’ if he had four cases in mind. I think he would probably have said
there were four. If Dr Banks had had in mind that there were another five or six cases that
some doctors, including him, would think it right to report, one would expect his level of
concern to have been raised further. It would then be most unlikely that he would use so
casual an expression as ‘a couple’ or ‘a few’. On the basis of his own assessment of the
propriety of Shipman’s certification of these ten cases (or nine, if Mrs Pomfret is excluded),
it seems clear to me that Dr Banks should have felt some real concern about Shipman’s
willingness to certify deaths rather than refer them to the coroner. Yet, whether he used
the expression ‘a couple’ or ‘a few’, it is clear that he did not. Dr Banks agreed that he
would not have used those expressions if he had had nine or ten cases in mind.
15.18 I note also that, whereas Dr Banks now says that four cases should definitely have been
referred to the coroner, DI Smith had the impression that Dr Banks was saying that he
personally would have referred them, implying that it would have been within the limits of
reasonable conduct for a doctor to decide not to report such a case to the coroner.
Although, for reasons I have previously explained, I do not regard DI Smith as a generally
reliable witness, I am inclined to accept his evidence on this point. I say that, first, because
a low level of concern is reflected in Mrs Parkinson’s note made on 27th March and there
would be no reason for Dr Banks’ attitude to have changed by 1st April. Second, if Dr Banks
had said that Shipman had failed to report even two deaths (let alone ‘a few’ or four) which
any reasonable doctor would have known he should report, I think it is likely to have made
some impression on DI Smith. Third, when writing his report for the Health Authority, which
was his earliest known account of these events, Dr Banks said that he had ‘ ... expressed
concern that in a number of cases there was insufficient evidence in the records on
which to base a cause of death and that I personally would have arranged a postmortem’.
15.19 It appears to me that Dr Banks cannot have identified four cases as requiring referral to
the coroner. Had he done so, and had he also identified five or six other less clear-cut
cases, this would have given rise to a substantial degree of concern. I am satisfied that
Dr Banks’ actual level of concern was low and was properly reflected by Mrs Parkinson’s
note. I can only conclude that Dr Banks’ examination of the records, and the judgement
he brought to bear, were adversely affected by his inability or unwillingness to open his
mind to the possibility that any doctor might harm his patients, particularly Shipman, of
whom he thought well.
123
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
Concern about the Common Features
15.20 Dr Banks said that he had not noticed any common features between the deaths. It will be
recalled that one of the common features Dr Banks understood he was supposed to look
for was Shipman’s presence at or around the time of death. As he was taken through the
14 sets of records, Dr Banks’ attention was drawn to the fact that, in seven cases, the
records showed that Shipman had seen the patient not long before the death was
discovered. In each case, the notes recorded that he had visited on the day of death (or,
in one case, on the day before). The medical records did not suggest any serious cause
for concern about the patient’s health; certainly, there was nothing that appeared to
presage death. Yet the patient had been found dead later that day (or, in one case, early
the following day). These cases were those of Mrs Elizabeth Battersby, Mrs Mavis Pickup,
Mrs Pomfret, Mr King, Mrs Davies, Mrs Hillier and Mrs Nuttall. Dr Banks said that he did
not know whether he had noted these similarities. In my view, they were plainly very
remarkable and significant. It is unusual for a patient to be found dead within a few hours
of a doctor’s home visit in circumstances where the doctor did not appear to have felt any
concern for the patient’s health. Such an event might suggest that the visiting doctor had
misdiagnosed the patient’s condition. If this kind of misdiagnosis were to happen once
within six months, that might not be thought significant but if such an event were to occur
seven times in six months, one would expect any doctor to notice it and to be concerned.
15.21 Yet it appears that Dr Banks did not notice this common feature. In the ‘Who Saw’ column
of his chart (in which he had intended to record who had been present at or around the
time of death), Dr Banks noted Shipman’s name in no fewer than ten of the 14 cases.
However, it appears that he was interested, not in whether Shipman had been present
shortly before the death was discovered, but in whether Shipman had found the body.
That, he said, was not always clear from the records. In any event, he said, he did not
regard it as strange that Shipman should have been around at the time of the death, as it
was common for a general practitioner to be called to a death. That is plainly true and I
can understand why presence after the death would not give rise to suspicion. It had been
suggested to Dr Banks that Shipman often appeared to be the one to find the body and
he is right to say that it was not always possible to tell from the records whether or not he
had done so. However, if Dr Banks had only applied his mind to the slightly different but
related question of Shipman’s presence shortly before the death was discovered, he
would have noticed a factor of real significance and concern.
15.22 In evidence, Dr Banks agreed that there were some common features to be found in the
14 sets of records. One striking feature was that most deaths involved elderly females. Of
the 14 deaths, 13 were women. Given the overall population mix, that is unusual. Ten of the
14 deceased had been aged over 70; that does not seem in any way remarkable. Another
concern expressed was that the deaths had occurred at home. Of the 14 deaths, 12 had
died in their own private homes; the other two were in residential care or nursing homes.
I would have expected that to strike Dr Banks as unusual.
15.23 Dr Banks said that he did not appreciate that there was a high incidence of some of the
features that he had been asked to look out for. He said that he had been told that the
deaths which caused concern had all the common features. So, as he found deviations
124
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
from the pattern, he concluded that there was no pattern. I find it hard to credit that a doctor
of Dr Banks’ experience could have taken so simplistic a view. I think this must be an
attempt at an excuse which, in fact, does him little credit. Any person of even modest
intelligence would realise that, if a doctor was suspected of killing his patients using a
similar method each time, one would expect to see a pattern of similarities between the
deaths. However, one would not expect that pattern to be found in every patient’s death;
one would expect that some patients would happen to die naturally; their deaths would not
conform to the pattern. I do not think that Dr Banks could have taken so simplistic a view
of his task. The way he put it to Mrs Parkinson was that no two cases were the same. That is
very different from saying that there is no pattern of significance because there is no factor
present in all cases.
15.24 There can be no doubt that Dr Banks should have noticed that all but one of the deaths
was of a female patient. This was one of the matters of concern and it was an odd feature.
I think he should also have been slightly puzzled at the high incidence of home deaths. I
also think that he ought, in the circumstances, to have noticed that, although there was no
clear evidence that Shipman found his patients dead, he had seen the patient shortly
before the death was discovered in an unusual number of cases. I conclude that Dr Banks’
search for the common features was superficial.
Signs of Substandard Care
15.25 Dr Banks said that he had not considered the records to see if they revealed any signs of
substandard care. He had not been asked to do so and he would have thought it
dangerous to do so, as he thought the records might be incomplete. He was then taken
through some cases which, in the submission of Leading Counsel to the Inquiry, showed
clear evidence of substandard treatment such as would give rise to concern in the mind
of any doctor who examined the records with reasonable skill and care.
15.26 The first was the case of Mrs Elizabeth Battersby, whose records show that she died of a
pulmonary embolism, supposedly following a deep vein thrombosis, for which she was not
admitted to hospital but was treated at home on an oral anticoagulant. Dr Banks said that
he thought the records might be incomplete and that, if they were complete, they would
have shown that Shipman had taken advice from the hospital about treatment at home. In
other words, it appears that his approach to the records in this case was to look for an
innocent explanation for anything unusual. He agreed that, when he examined
Mrs Battersby’s records again, in September 1998 (by which time Shipman was under
investigation for the murder of Mrs Kathleen Grundy), he expressed the opinion that
Shipman’s standard of care was unacceptable. His explanation for this change of view
was that, by September, he had a different mindset. In March, he would have found it
inconceivable that Shipman might have harmed a patient. By September, his mind was
open to that possibility. In March, he had not thought that there was any reason for concern
about this death and had not thought that it should have been reported to the coroner. He
now accepted that the records did reveal cause for concern and a reason to refer the case
to the coroner. That meant that he conceded that, in all, 11 of the 14 cases ought perhaps
to have been referred to the coroner.
125
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
15.27 Another set of records about which Dr Banks was asked were those of Mrs Mavis Pickup.
Shipman had certified that Mrs Pickup had died of a cerebrovascular accident or stroke.
The records showed that Shipman visited her on the day of her death. He recorded a
history of symptoms that sounded like either a transient ischaemic attack or a minor stroke,
from which Mrs Pickup seemed to be recovering. No treatment had been prescribed.
Mrs Pickup was said to have been confused. She was found dead later in the day. When
asked whether he felt any concern on reading that Mrs Pickup had been in a confused
state and yet had been left alone, Dr Banks said that it was not clear whether Mrs Pickup
had been left alone. However, he agreed that it was clear that she was alone when found
dead later in the day. He did not think this seemed strange or worrying. He agreed that the
history, which suggested a minor stroke earlier in the day followed by an overwhelming
stroke leading to sudden death, was an unusual combination and that a sudden death
would not have been expected following a slight stroke. However, Dr Banks said, it was
not impossible that that had occurred and he had not seen the combination as unusual at
the time. If he had thought it was unusual, he would have put it down to inaccuracy in the
records. He agreed that his approach was affected by his belief that Shipman was a
competent and respected practitioner. In any event, Dr Banks recorded no concern about
Mrs Pickup on his chart and did not think that the circumstances of her death warranted
a report to the coroner.
15.28 It is clear from the cases of Mrs Battersby and Mrs Pickup that Dr Banks approached his
examination of the medical records in the belief that there would be no cause for concern.
In my view, Dr Banks’ prior knowledge of Shipman made him an unsuitable person to form
any judgements about Shipman’s actions or competence. Dr Banks said that he thought
that his prior knowledge of Shipman would have made it inappropriate for him to write a
commentary on Shipman’s work but he felt that it was acceptable for him to undertake
the task of extracting facts from the records. I see the distinction that Dr Banks sought
to draw. However, in my view, even the extraction of facts calls for the exercise of some
judgement, particularly where, as here, the facts are not clearly set out and inferences
have to be drawn.
Findings
On the Basis of the Medical Records that Dr Banks Actually Considered
15.29 In my view, Dr Banks failed to see that which was there to be seen on a careful and openminded
examination of the records. He failed to recognise features that tended to support
the concerns expressed. Why? I do not think the problem was that he was lazy or did not
care. I think he is a reasonably conscientious man, although I do not think he would usually
exert himself beyond the call of duty. I think he simply could not open his mind to the
possibility that Shipman might have harmed a patient. Accordingly, instead of searching
for the odd features, he anticipated that all would be normal. For such features as did strike
him as odd, he immediately found an innocent explanation. I think also that he thought that
the expression of concern by the general practitioner was probably underlain by
professional jealousy or some other personal animosity. That attitude too was born of his
prejudice in favour of Shipman.
126
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
15.30 In mitigation of this failure, I accept that Dr Banks was not given all the information he could
and should have been given. It should have been spelled out to him that a general
practitioner, who appeared to be a responsible person, was concerned that Shipman
might be killing his patients and that these concerns were shared by an undertaker. The
Coroner had referred the matter to the police for investigation. He should have been told
of the comparative death rates of the two practices concerned. I think there is a real
possibility that, if Dr Banks had been fully informed, his mind might not have been quite
so tightly closed against the possibility of Shipman’s guilt.
On the Basis of the Medical Records that Dr Banks Might Have Considered
15.31 It remains to consider what the outcome might have been if the staff at the Tameside
register office had identified all the deaths of Shipman’s patients certified by him in the
previous six-month period. Instead of receiving a bundle of 19 (or 20) copy certificates,
DI Smith would have received 31. I have said that I do not think this would have had any
significant effect on DI Smith’s approach to the investigation. What would have been the
effect on Dr Banks? Not only would Dr Banks have known of more deaths, he would also
have examined more sets of records.
15.32 Dr Banks said that he did not know the average death rate for patients of a general
practice. The figure he was given, 16 cremations in three months, did not strike him as
particularly high. If that figure did not strike him as high, then it seems highly unlikely that
31 deaths in six months would have made any impression on him. However, the position
is not quite so straightforward. Dr Banks said that he noticed that the 14 sets of records
he looked at initially covered a period of six months and he said that he ‘assumed’ that the
figure of 16 cremations in three months was wrong. His view that the death rate was not
abnormal might have been affected by his assumption that the figures were wrong
anyway. If DI Smith had had 31 copy certificates and if he had provided all or nearly all
the names to the Health Authority, Dr Banks would probably have accepted the figures as
accurate. It is impossible to say whether the death rate would have then appeared to him
as high. I can only say that the chance that he would have thought the death rate abnormal
would have been increased.
15.33 However, Dr Banks would also have examined a larger number of sets of records. It is
impossible to say with certainty how many he would have seen. I think DI Smith would
probably still have withheld the names of Miss Maureen Ward and Mr Harold Eddleston
initially, on the grounds that the deaths were certified as being due to cancer. I think it
unlikely that the records for any death occurring after 1st March 1998 would have been
available. It is therefore unlikely that Dr Banks would have examined the records of
Mrs Irene Chapman, Miss Ada Warburton or Mrs Martha Marley. Accordingly I estimate
that he probably would have seen nine additional sets of records, making 23 in all. The
additional records would have related to Mrs Bessie Swann, Mrs Enid Otter,
Mrs Florence Lewis, Mrs Mary Walls, Mrs Elizabeth Baddeley, Mrs Kathleen Wagstaff,
Mrs Alice Black, Mrs Laura Linn and Mrs Irene Berry.
15.34 Of these nine additional cases, it is noteworthy that all the deceased were women.
Shipman had been present at three of the deaths (those of Mrs Walls, Mrs Linn and
127
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
Mrs Wagstaff) although, in the case of Mrs Linn, her husband had also been present.
Shipman appeared to have been present alone with the patient at the other two deaths.
This was an unusual feature and was a cause for concern. Of the nine deaths, there were
six in which the question of a report to the coroner should have been raised in Dr Banks’
mind. These were Mrs Swann (whom Shipman had not seen for three months), Mrs Walls
and Mrs Black (in respect of whom there was no information about the cause of death),
Mrs Baddeley (where it was not clear when Shipman had last seen her and the records
did not support ‘old age’ as the cause of death) and Mrs Wagstaff and Mrs Berry (where
there was no adequate correlation between the medical history and the given cause of
death).
15.35 Although there was an abundance of relevant information available for Dr Banks to see,
much of which tended to support the concerns which had been raised, I cannot say with
confidence that Dr Banks would have realised the significance of this additional material
if he had seen it. The same trends were present in the tranche of 14 in roughly the same
proportion as they were present in the whole group of 23. Ten deaths out of 14 and
16 deaths out of 23 raised a question of a report to the coroner. Yet, Dr Banks expressed
only a mild degree of concern about ‘a couple’, or possibly ‘a few’, of the group of ten. Of
course, I recognise that the chance that Dr Banks would register some real concern would
have been enhanced if he had seen 23 sets of records rather than 14. However, I cannot
say that he would probably have expressed real concern to DI Smith if he had seen all the
available records.
Dr Banks’ Duty to Report to Senior Officials Within the Health Authority
15.36 Dr Banks also faced criticism for his failure to inform a more senior member of staff at the
WPHA of the nature and purpose of the request that he had received from the police in
relation to the examination of medical records. As I have observed, he did not mention the
matter to anyone senior to him although, of course, Dr Bradshaw, his ‘job share’ partner,
was aware of what he was doing.
15.37 The most obvious person Dr Banks might have told was his immediate line manager,
Mrs Jan Forster, Director of Primary Care. The view of Mrs Forster, and of those senior to
her in the Health Authority, was that Dr Banks should have told her of DI Smith’s request
and of his intention to comply. Yet, she agreed that Dr Banks’ job description did not make
plain the scope of his discretion to make his own decisions about his work. That is plainly
so. Dr Banks said that, as he is medically qualified and Mrs Forster is not, he took it that
he was entitled to undertake, without reference to her, tasks which appeared to fall within
the scope of his work as a medical adviser. He said that, before the amalgamation of the
Tameside and Oldham Family Health Services Authorities in 1996, he had a very large
measure of autonomy. This had never been officially changed. He felt that the decision
to examine these records was one he could properly take alone. He accepted that, with
hindsight, it would have been better if he had consulted Mrs Forster but contended that
he should not be criticised for his failure to do so.
15.38 I accept that submission to a large extent. I think it was an error of judgement on Dr Banks’
part that he did not tell Mrs Forster. He underestimated the potential seriousness of the
128
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
request and the possible implications for the Health Authority. However, I do not think it
could be said that he overstepped the boundaries of his authority.
15.39 If Mrs Forster had been told, there would have been two probable consequences. First,
she would probably have ensured that relations between the police and the Health
Authority were put on a more formal basis. I think it likely that Mrs Forster would have
required the police to submit a formal written request either for disclosure of the records
or for assistance with the examination of the records. Such formality would have focussed
the minds of both the police and the Health Authority on what exactly was required. I think
it would also have brought home to Dr Banks the seriousness of the concerns. It would
have been less easy for him to dismiss the suspicions as inconceivable.
15.40 Second, and even more important, I think it likely that Mrs Forster would have realised that,
as Shipman was known to the medical staff within the WPHA, it would be preferable for the
police to seek expert advice elsewhere. DI Smith would not have known whom to consult
and might well have asked the advice of Mr Postles. Had he done so, there is a real
possibility that the police would have instructed someone with a greater degree of
expertise (to say nothing of greater objectivity) than Dr Banks. They might well have found
and instructed Dr John Grenville, whom they used when they needed advice during the
second investigation. I have no doubt at all that Dr Grenville’s examination of the records
would, like Dr Cranfield’s, have resulted in the realisation that Shipman’s conduct was far
from normal. That is another way in which this investigation might have reached a different
conclusion.
15.41 Mrs Forster’s main criticism of Dr Banks was that he did not keep any proper record of the
request he received from the police or of what he had done and the conclusions he had
reached. I accept the validity of that criticism. However, Dr Banks’ failure in this respect
did not affect the outcome of the investigation.
15.42 It was also suggested that Dr Banks should have informed Dr Ellis Friedman, the Director
of Public Health Medicine, about the police request. Dr Banks pointed out that his job
description required him to liaise with Dr Friedman but that he was not expected to report
to him. That I accept. I do not think that Dr Banks’ decision to examine the records without
first speaking to Dr Friedman could be described as misconduct.
15.43 I have already observed that Dr Banks is open to criticism in that he did not speak to
Dr Friedman about the death rate in Shipman’s practice. As Director of Public Health
Medicine, Dr Friedman knew a good deal about death rates. He said he would have
regarded the figure provided by DI Smith to Mrs Parkinson (16 cremations in three months)
as rather high. Dr Friedman would have realised that the 16 cremations would not be the
total number of deaths in the three-month period. He would have realised that there would
be other deaths followed by burial and still others which had taken place in hospital. I think
that the figure would have rung an alarm bell in Dr Friedman’s mind even if he had not been
told that the unknown general practitioner had been worried by it. This concern would or
should have been relayed to DI Smith, who would then have begun to appreciate the
significance of the numbers and comparative death rates. He would then have known that
the investigation could not be closed.
129
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: E ProofRound: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
15.44 DI Smith shares some of the responsibility for the failure of Dr Banks to refer the issue of
death rates to Dr Friedman. If, during his discussion with Dr Banks, DI Smith had
mentioned the comparative death rates and the unknown general practitioner’s concern
about them, the matter might have been taken forward. DI Smith had never understood the
importance of the comparative death rates. Here was a chance to have them explained to
him. But he never even asked. I find it profoundly disappointing that these two
experienced professional men should have met to discuss whether there was evidence in
the medical records to support the suspicion that Shipman might be killing his patients
and yet neither the doctor nor the policeman thought of discussing the death rate.
15.45 If DI Smith had told Dr Banks of the comparative death rates of the two practices, I think
it likely that Dr Banks would have referred the matter to Dr Friedman. I cannot say so with
certainty, as relations between him and Dr Friedman were not good. Indeed, had relations
been better, Dr Banks might have decided to discuss the whole issue of the suspicions
about Shipman with Dr Friedman. That is speculation. As I have said, I am sure that if the
death rates had, for any reason, been mentioned to Dr Friedman the police would have
realised that further enquiries were necessary. This is another route by which the failure
of this investigation might have been averted.
Dr Banks’ Suspension and the Disciplinary Proceedings Against Him
15.46 As Shipman’s trial approached and the extent of his criminality began to emerge, senior
officials in the Health Authority appreciated that the Authority might be subject to criticism
for its part in the failed police investigation. Dr Banks was asked to report on what he had
done. There was some difference of opinion among senior officials as to whether Dr Banks
ought to have reported DI Smith’s request for assistance to his line manager or to
Dr Friedman. However, Dr Banks continued at work and (apart from a brief reference at a
meeting, which was taken no further) there was no suggestion that disciplinary
proceedings might be taken. Indeed, during Shipman’s trial, Dr Banks attended the
hearings as the Health Authority’s representative.
15.47 It was not until the jury had retired and conviction appeared imminent that any suggestion
was made that Dr Banks might face disciplinary action. Mr Alan Langlands, the Chief
Executive of the National Health Service Executive, took the view that Dr Banks should be
suspended from duty pending an investigation with a view to disciplinary action. The
Health Authority was reluctant to take this course but was persuaded to do so and
Dr Banks was informed of this decision on 26th January 2000. He was to remain under
suspension for over seven months.
15.48 The disciplinary investigation revolved around three potential areas of criticism, which
were eventually formulated into charges. In summary it was alleged that:
(a) He had failed to refer the police request to the Executive Board, having regard in
particular to the unusual fact that the investigation had been prompted by another
general practitioner and to the high number of deaths. This was said to constitute
marked inadequacy in the exercise of his medical professional competence or
conduct.
130
SHIP02$$21 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: O ProofRound: 3
(b) He had failed to take greater care in investigating the issue, given the high number
of deaths and the involvement of another general practitioner, the Coroner and the
police.
(c) He had failed to consider adequately the context of the request to examine the
medical records and to assess appropriately the need for further investigation.
15.49 The Health Authority instructed solicitors to advise and they, in turn, instructed counsel.
Two suitable experts were identified and were asked to consider the records examined
by Dr Banks and to advise on the adequacy of his review. Dr Chris Veal was of the opinion
that the medical records disclosed cause for concern which should have been brought to
the attention of senior management in the Health Authority and the police. Dr Moorman
thought that Dr Banks had behaved ‘entirely appropriately’. The opinions were put to
counsel who, after a conference with the doctors at which Dr Veal appears to have
modified his views significantly, advised that the disciplinary process should be
abandoned. In view of the expert evidence and legal advice that they received, the Health
Authority cannot, in my view, be criticised for their decision to abandon the proceedings.
Dr Banks was reinstated on 14th August 2000 and remained at work until he suffered a
heart attack in November 2001.
131
SHIP02P015 09-04-03 21:45:24 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P015 Page Type: BLANK ProofRound: 3
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: SO Proof Round: 3
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Conclusions
16.1 In the previous Chapters, I have set out my findings as to the conduct of each stage and
aspect of the investigation. It will be apparent that I consider that the conduct of Chief
Superintendent Sykes, Detective Inspector Smith and Dr Banks fell below the standard
which the community is entitled to expect of public servants in their respective positions.
In this final Chapter, I shall summarise the reasons for the failure of the investigation and
shall attempt broadly to apportion the responsibility for that failure among those involved
in the investigation. I shall also consider, so far as I am able, what would probably have
happened if the investigation had been conducted with a reasonable degree of diligence
and competence.
Who Was to Blame?
Chief Superintendent Sykes
16.2 In my view, the primary reasons why this investigation failed were that CS Sykes instructed
DI Smith to undertake the investigation and kept to himself the responsibility for
supervision. He was culpably wrong in both respects. He realised that the concerns raised
were unusual and potentially serious. He should have realised that the investigation would
not be of a routine nature. He should have discovered (if he did not already know) that
DI Smith was not accustomed to working without direction and supervision. He should
have realised that he himself did not have the experience to direct or supervise the
investigation. His decision to retain responsibility himself was not merely a poor decision
within the band of decisions open to him; it was fundamentally wrong. CS Sykes should
have discussed the matter with Mr Postles, who was the divisional adviser on criminal
matters. Mr Postles would have advised as to the appropriate level of seniority within the
GMP to which the concerns should be reported. I am satisfied that, had that been done,
a properly directed investigation would have taken place.
16.3 I am critical of CS Sykes in other respects also. Once the investigation was under way, he
failed to realise that DI Smith was out of his depth. If he had discussed the issues in any
detail, in the way in which Detective Chief Superintendent Stelfox said he would have
discussed them, he would have realised the extent of DI Smith’s lack of understanding.
His failure was partly due to his own lack of experience of criminal investigation. However,
even lacking such experience, I consider that he should have realised that DI Smith had
not satisfied himself that the death rate among Shipman’s patients was not abnormally
high. CS Sykes should not have left it to DI Smith to decide when the investigation was to
be closed. If, even at that stage, he had asked a senior detective officer to scrutinise the
information that DI Smith had gathered, its inadequacy would have been discovered and
a proper investigation could have taken place, albeit after some delay.
16.4 I have been unable to reach any firm conclusion about why CS Sykes resolved to retain
control of this investigation. I suspect that he decided to retain control because he did not
wish it to appear to the Coroner that he did not have the experience to control the
investigation personally. In mitigation of CS Sykes’ failures, I believe that he recognised
133
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
that he had made errors and that the apology that he offered to the bereaved families at
the conclusion of his oral evidence to the Inquiry was genuine and deeply felt.
Detective Inspector Smith
16.5 I have been very critical of DI Smith in respect of many aspects of the conduct of the
investigation. I recognise that many of the mistakes he made were the result of his lack of
experience of criminal investigations of a non-routine nature. I can summarise my criticism
of him by saying that he was wrong to continue with his investigation without seeking the
advice of a senior and more experienced detective officer. He soldiered on alone,
pretending to all involved that he knew what he was doing, when, as he admitted in
evidence, he did not know ‘where to go’. He should have acknowledged at the time that
he was in difficulty. The result of his failure to seek advice was that he never understood
the issues, never had a plan of action, had no one to help him analyse the information he
received, had no one to make suggestions as to the information he should seek from the
available witnesses (Dr Reynolds and Mrs Bambroffe) and was allowed to close the
investigation before it was complete.
16.6 In mitigation of this fault, I believe that he should, without having to ask for it, have had the
benefit of supervision by a senior detective officer. Also, he received poor advice from
Dr Banks. The idea of seeking the medical records was a good one. His decision to allow
Dr Banks to review the records without having any very clear idea of the purpose behind
the review was unfortunate but resulted from his lack of ‘direction’.
16.7 DI Smith was not assisted by the failure of the staff at the Tameside register office to
provide him with a complete bundle of copy death certificates. However, I do not consider
that this failure had any material effect on the course of the investigation.
16.8 I accept that DI Smith found it difficult to believe that Shipman might have murdered his
patients. Many witnesses spoke of this difficulty; it became known as the ‘credibility gap’.
I must give this factor due weight if I am to avoid the danger of judging with the benefit of
hindsight. However, I cannot accept that this difficulty can provide an excuse for the
particular shortcomings I have identified above. I observe that Dr Reynolds had
surmounted this difficulty and had made her complaint.
16.9 I do not consider that DI Smith is primarily responsible for the failure of the investigation. He
was not a suitable person to be put in charge of it. However, in two respects, his inaction
contributed directly to the adverse result. One was his failure to collect detailed
information from Dr Reynolds. Any detective, however unaccustomed to self-direction,
should have known he must do that. The second (and more crucial) was his failure to
report to the Coroner the fact that the bodies of Miss Ada Warburton and Mrs Lily Higgins
were available for an autopsy if the Coroner thought fit to order one.
16.10 Although DI Smith’s conduct since April 1998 has had no effect on the course of the
investigation of Shipman’s crimes, I must comment upon it. His lack of frankness merits
strong criticism. In the several accounts of his investigation given to the police, he
consistently sought to attribute its failure to the fault of others. I well understand the natural
human reaction by which we all seek to interpret events so as to absolve ourselves from
134
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
blame, but the line must be drawn when it comes to telling lies. DI Smith told lies in his
report of August 1998 and when speaking to Detective Superintendent Ellis. He repeated
some of those lies in statements made to this Inquiry. In oral evidence, he told the truth
about some matters, thereby correcting his earlier accounts. For that he deserves credit.
However, he has continued to the end to lie about the circumstances in which he learned
of the death of Miss Ada Warburton. He did so in an attempt to evade responsibility for his
failure to arrange an autopsy on her body.
Dr Banks
16.11 In my judgement, Dr Banks must bear some responsibility for the failure of the
investigation, although I consider that his contribution is substantially less than that of
CS Sykes and DI Smith.
16.12 He failed to notice the causes for concern that were there to be seen in the medical records
he examined. He failed to realise that the records suggested that Shipman had repeatedly
failed to report to the coroner deaths that any reasonable doctor would have reported. He
failed to notice that many of the deaths contained some of the very features that had been
mentioned as having given rise to concern. He failed in these respects, not because he
was lazy or incompetent or because the task of reviewing the records was beyond him,
but because he could not open his mind to the possibility that Shipman might have killed
his patients or even that he might have given them substandard care. That mindset would
have been excusable if he had not known that the reason why the police were making
enquiries was because a concern had arisen that Shipman might be killing his patients. I
accept that Dr Banks’ knowledge of, and respect for, Shipman made it even more difficult
for him to have an open mind. The ‘credibility gap’ amounts to mitigation for Dr Banks’
failures, but cannot provide an excuse in the case of a professional man asked for his
professional opinion.
16.13 Because he knew the nature of the underlying concern, Dr Banks ought also to have given
more careful consideration to the numbers of deaths among Shipman’s patients. I find it
surprising that a doctor of his experience should not know the annual crude death rate for
patients in UK general practice. It is ten deaths per year per thousand of the population,
a very easy number to remember. If he did not know it, he should have found it out and
should have alerted DI Smith to the fact that, for a single-handed practitioner, 16 deaths
(and, even more so, 16 cremations) in three months seemed rather high. Instead, it is likely
that he gave DI Smith the impression that the numbers did not strike him as particularly
high.
16.14 These were important failures which, had they not occurred, might well have brought
about a different result.
What Would the Outcome Have Been?
16.15 In my view, if CS Sykes had put the investigation in the hands of a more senior detective
than DI Smith, one who had experience of devising and supervising a criminal
investigation and, if that officer had acted with reasonable expedition, the whole course
of the investigation would have been different.
135
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
16.16 A more senior and experienced officer would have recognised the potential significance
of the disparity in the death rates between Shipman’s practice and the Brooke Practice.
He would have investigated that issue. I think it likely that an official approach for advice
would have been made to the WPHA, at a higher level than was made, and this would have
resulted in the realisation that the death rate was abnormal. Although detailed work on
death rates might have taken several weeks, a provisional view could have been provided
within a day or two. This would have been based on accurate figures as, if the register
office had failed to produce a complete bundle of copy death certificates, comparison
with the Brooke Practice records would have exposed the error.
16.17 A thorough exploration of Dr Reynolds’ concerns would have been made within a day or
two of her initial report. Almost certainly, Dr Reynolds would have persuaded
Mrs Bambroffe to speak to the police. The police would then have had a proper
understanding of the nature of, and reasons for, the concerns.
16.18 Had these interviews taken place within a few days, as they easily could have done, it
would not then have been too late for an autopsy to take place on the body of
Miss Ada Warburton or Mrs Martha Marley. As it would have been appreciated that, if
Shipman had caused the death of either of these patients, he must have done so by means
of a drug, toxicological tests would have been performed and morphine would have been
found. An inquest would have been ordered and Shipman would have come to learn that
he was under suspicion. I do not think he would have killed any more patients after that.
16.19 Even if the opportunity for an autopsy on the body of Miss Warburton or Mrs Marley had
been lost, the police would have learned of the existence of cremation Forms B, which
would have provided much information. The police would then have arranged for the
medical records of the deceased patients to be examined by a suitable expert. I am
confident that the WPHA would have agreed to access by an expert. Examination by
someone such as Dr John Grenville or Dr Frances Cranfield would have revealed cause
for grave concern. The expert would have found evidence of deaths which had not been
reported to the coroner when they should have been, evidence of deaths which occurred
or were discovered very shortly after a visit by Shipman and evidence of poor care in the
period shortly before death. When considered in conjunction with advice from the Health
Authority about death rates, I consider that the level of concern would have been such that
the police would have begun to think about identifying a body for exhumation. They would
also have examined the PNC and would have learned of Shipman’s past convictions for
drug abuse.
16.20 The medical expert would have been able to identify a death that gave rise to particular
concerns, such as that of Mrs Bianka Pomfret, who had died on 10th December 1997, at
the age of only 49, and whose body was available for exhumation. Shipman was convicted
of killing Mrs Pomfret. Examination of her records would have given rise to real concern
and I think she would have been the most probable choice. I think it likely that the Coroner,
who would have been concerned to realise that deaths which should have been reported
to him had not been reported, would have been willing to order exhumation, autopsy and
toxicological tests. Morphine would have been found. It would not have been long before
Shipman became aware of what had been going on and I do not think he would have killed
136
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
again. Of course, I accept that it is possible that the expert might have suggested the
exhumation of a body, such as that of Mrs Winifred Healey, who, on my findings, died a
natural death, in which case no morphine would have been found. Another possibility is
that the Coroner might have refused to order exhumation. That would have left the police
to seek an autopsy in the next suspicious death of which they became aware.
16.21 If the first opportunity to conduct autopsies had been lost, the steps I have outlined might
well have taken several weeks. However, I think that the progress of the investigation
would have given rise to an increasing sense of urgency. Although I cannot be certain of
this, I think that, if the police and the Coroner had moved with reasonable expedition, the
lives of Shipman’s last three victims would probably have been saved.
16.22 I turn to consider the alternative set of circumstances which would have arisen if CS Sykes
had instructed DI Smith to commence the investigation but had discovered at some stage
that he was out of his depth. Plainly, any delay in the appointment of a competent and
suitably experienced detective would have reduced the likelihood that Shipman would
have been stopped before killing again. The possibilities are many. DI Smith might have
admitted his difficulties at an early stage, in which case there might have been very little
delay in appointing a more senior detective officer. If, on 1st April 1998, Dr Banks had told
DI Smith that the records raised some concerns, this might have been the trigger for the
appointment of a more senior and competent detective officer. Another possibility is that
CS Sykes might have discovered the inadequacy of DI Smith’s work if he had asked him
to write a report at the end of the investigation. He would then have taken the advice of
Mr Postles and the investigation would have been put onto the right track, albeit about four
weeks late. Plainly, the later the change of officer in charge, the poorer the chance that
Shipman would have been stopped before killing again.
The Greater Manchester Police Internal Investigation
16.23 I believe that the GMP know that their own internal enquiries into the failure of the March
1998 investigation were quite inadequate. It must be a matter of regret and criticism that
there should have been so wide a chasm between the fine words and good intentions as
expressed by Assistant Chief Constable Sweeney and the reality of the enquiry which
followed.
16.24 It appears to me that the fault for this disparity lies with those senior officers who decided
upon the scope of the enquiry and the personnel who were to undertake it. Det Supt Ellis
was not a suitable choice. He was not sufficiently senior even to investigate the actions of
CS Sykes, let alone form a judgement about him. Whoever was put in charge of these
enquiries should have been required to cross-check the accounts given by the two
officers under investigation against other information available to the police. When the
factual enquiries were complete, the report should have been subjected to critical
analysis by a senior officer, who should have been responsible for making a judgement
about whether or not any officer appeared to be open to criticism and whether or not any
lessons should be learned.
16.25 Two explanations were advanced for the failure of the police to conduct an adequate
internal enquiry. First, it was said that the police could not interview witnesses from outside
137
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: E Proof Round: 3
The Shipman Inquiry
the Force because an external inquiry was pending. That was so, but they could very well
have looked into their management failures. They did not need to interview any witness
other than CS Sykes to find out that he had retained control of the investigation and knew
so little of criminal investigation procedures that he had not even required DI Smith to write
a report. That excuse will not do. The second was that the police were hamstrung because
they could not obtain any evidence from officers without warning them that they might face
disciplinary proceedings and offering them all the safeguards provided by the disciplinary
code. This cannot be so. If it is not possible to investigate conduct which might amount to
a disciplinary offence, there could never be any disciplinary proceedings.
16.26 I do accept that the senior officers of the Force would be likely to set out on such an enquiry
in the expectation that a detective inspector would, broadly speaking, tell the truth about
what had happened. But, on discovering that DI Smith had not made any proper record of
an investigation that was known to have failed, I do not think that continued unquestioning
confidence in his veracity should have been maintained.
Recommendations to the Greater Manchester Police
16.27 Although senior officers of the GMP said in evidence that they hoped that I would make
recommendations that might assist in improving their procedures, there is very little I wish
to say.
16.28 The main reason why this investigation failed was that the wrong people were in charge
of it. If officers with the requisite experience had been assigned to it, there would have
been no difficulty in devising a proper plan of action. It would be to state the obvious if I
were to say that the GMP ought to put in place procedures which would ensure that
investigations were assigned to and supervised by officers with appropriate experience.
16.29 Nowadays, good police practice requires that there should be a protocol for the handling
of many types of situation that occur on a regular basis. However, there will always be
some sets of circumstances that are new and different from what has happened before.
There cannot be a protocol for every eventuality. Some problems can be resolved only by
the application of the minds of people with the necessary intelligence and experience. The
investigation of Dr Reynolds’ concerns was one such problem. The GMP know that as well
as I do.
16.30 Although I have said that there cannot be a protocol for every eventuality, it does appear
to me that some guidance should be issued to those detective officers who have to
undertake investigations into allegations of wrongdoing by health professionals. Such
investigations may take place in the context of a criminal investigation and, at the present
time, the police are often involved in investigations on behalf of the coroner into allegations
of mistreatment where the conduct alleged falls short of gross negligence. Since the
hearings into the first police investigation were completed, the Inquiry has learned that a
group led by Detective Chief Superintendent Steve Watts of the Hampshire Constabulary
is working on guidance for officers involved in work of this kind. I have seen the first draft
and it appears that the guidance will be very useful. One of the problems discussed is the
identification of an appropriately qualified and independent expert to assess the evidence
138
SHIP02$$22 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: O Proof Round: 3
gathered and to advise on the issues of culpability. At present, the draft guidance
recognises the difficulties but makes no practical suggestions as to how they might be
overcome. This is understandable; the solution is by no means straightforward. For
reasons of confidentiality, the police must be extremely careful about whom they consult
for advice. There are various published directories of experts. However, an officer cannot
use a directory effectively if he does not know in which field of expertise he needs advice.
In some cases, the police will readily recognise what sort of expert they need but not in
all cases. Modern medicine is highly specialised. It seems to me that the police need an
established route by which advice of this nature can be found. I make two suggestions.
One is that, if and when the medical coroner service comes into being (as I will
recommend in my Third Report), it would be appropriate for a medical coroner or a
regional medical coroner to maintain a register of suitable experts and to provide
confidential advice to the police. A second suggestion is that the police should invite the
Crown Prosecution Service to provide access to an in-house solicitor with medico-legal
experience. Such a solicitor should have available lists of suitable experts and of counsel
with specialist medico-legal knowledge.
Final Thoughts
16.31 The hearing of this stage of the Inquiry has been a painful experience for many of those
involved. For those who faced criticism, it must have been a very anxious time. Those few
who have been found responsible must live with that responsibility for the rest of their lives.
I must and do feel sympathy for them, even though their predicament was of their own
making. It was a misfortune for CS Sykes, DI Smith and Dr Banks that they were ever
caught up in the consequences of Shipman’s criminality. There must be many others who
would also have failed if put in the position in which these men found themselves.
16.32 My final word must be for the families of Shipman’s last three victims. For them, these
hearings and the reading of this Report must have been profoundly distressing. Once
again, I can only offer them my deepest sympathy.
139
SHIP02P016 09-04-03 21:47:42 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: P016 Page Type: BLANK Proof Round: 3
SHIP02$$$2 09-04-03 21:51:21 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0A Page Type: SO Proof Round:
APPENDIX A
Notes made by Detective Inspector Smith
in his daybook during the course of the
March 1998investigation
141
SHIP02$$$2 09-04-03 21:51:21 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0A Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
Page referred to as ‘left-hand page’
142 APPENDIX A
SHIP02$$$2 09-04-03 21:51:21 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0A Page Type: O Proof Round:
Page referred to as ‘right-hand page’
APPENDIX A 143
SHIP02$$$2 09-04-03 21:51:21 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0A Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
144 APPENDIX A
SHIP02$$$2 09-04-03 21:51:21 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0A Page Type: O Proof Round:
APPENDIX A 145
SHIP02PA0A 09-04-03 21:51:21 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0A Page Type: BLANK Proof Round:
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: SO ProofRound:
APPENDIX B
Computer spreadsheet created by Detective Inspector Smith
in March/April 1998, setting out information obtained
from the copy death certificates and from
the Dukinfield crematorium
147
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: E ProofRound:
The Shipman Inquiry
148 APPENDIX B
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: O ProofRound:
APPENDIX B 149
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: E ProofRound:
The Shipman Inquiry
150 APPENDIX B
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: O ProofRound:
APPENDIX B 151
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: E ProofRound:
The Shipman Inquiry
152 APPENDIX B
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: O ProofRound:
APPENDIX B 153
SHIP02$$$3 31-03-03 14:40:20 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0B Page Type: E ProofRound:
The Shipman Inquiry
154 APPENDIX B
SHIP02$$$4 31-03-03 14:44:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0C Page Type: SO Proof Round:
APPENDIX C
Notes made by Mrs Janet Parkinson, formerly Consumer
Liaison Manager of the West Pennine Health Authority,
in March and April 1998
155
SHIP02$$$4 31-03-03 14:44:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0C Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
156 APPENDIX C
SHIP02$$$4 31-03-03 14:44:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0C Page Type: O Proof Round:
Post-it notes written by Mrs Janet Parkinson.
APPENDIX C 157
SHIP02$$$4 31-03-03 14:44:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0C Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
158 APPENDIX C
SHIP02$$$4 31-03-03 14:44:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0C Page Type: O Proof Round:
APPENDIX C 159
SHIP02$$$4 31-03-03 14:44:55 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0C Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
160 APPENDIX C
SHIP02$$26 31-03-03 14:49:46 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0D Page Type: SO Proof Round:
APPENDIX D
Chart compiled by Dr Alan Banks, Assistant Director of
Primary Care and Medical Adviser to the West Pennine
Health Authority, from information contained in 14 sets
of general practitioner records examined by him on
26th –27th March 1998
161
SHIP02$$26 31-03-03 14:49:46 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0D Page Type: E Proof Round:
The Shipman Inquiry
162 APPENDIX D
SHIP02$$26 31-03-03 14:49:46 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0D Page Type: O Proof Round:
APPENDIX D 163
SHIP02PA0D 31-03-03 14:49:46 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0D Page Type: BLANK Proof Round:
SHIP02$$24 27-03-03 17:55:47 Pag Table: SHIPMN Unit: PA0E Page Type: SO Proof Round: 1
APPENDIX E
Participants in Stage One of Phase Two of the Inquiry and their
Representatives
Counselto the Inquiry
Miss Caroline Swift QC
Mr Christopher Melton QC
Mr Anthony Mazzag
Mr Michael Jones
instructed by Mr Henry Palin, Solicitor to the Inquiry
Participants Representatives
Dr Alan Banks Dr Kevin Naylor, instructed by Mr Nick Rawson, Radcliffes
Le Brasseur Solicitors, Leeds, West Yorkshire
Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner, Miss Alison Hewitt, instructed by Mr Christopher Welton,
Greater Manchester South District Solicitor and Deputy Coroner, Greater Manchester South
District
Doctors from the Brooke Practice Mr Philip Gaisford, instructed by Ms Sarah Woodwark,
Radcliffes Le Brasseur Solicitors, Leeds, West Yorkshire
Dr Ellis Friedman Mr Peter Atherton, instructed by Mr Aidan Carr, Rowlands
Solicitors, Manchester
Greater Manchester Police Mr Michael Shorrock QC and Miss Kate Blackwell,
instructed by Mrs Sandra Pope, Greater Manchester Police
Force Solicitor
Mr Alan Massey Miss Joanne Connolly, instructed by Mr Guy Rogers, Pluck
Andrew Solicitors, Hyde, Cheshire
Detective Inspector David Smith Mr Bruce Stuart, instructed by Mr Nick Holroyd, Russell
Jones & Walker Solicitors, Manchester
Tameside Families Support Group Mr Richard Lissack QC, Mr Paul Gilroy, Mr Andrew Spink
and Miss Harriet Jerram, instructed by Ms Ann Alexander,
Alexander Harris Solicitors, Altrincham, Cheshire
Staff employed at Tameside Mr Geoffrey Tattersall QC, instructed by Ms Sylvia Roberts,
register office Borough Solicitor, Tameside Borough Council
West Pennine Health Authority Mr Gerard McDermott QC and Mr David Eccles, instructed
by Mr Charles Howorth, George Davies Solicitors,
Manchester
165
